Atlas Shrugged


Atlas Shrugged





Atlas Shrugged


This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.5)



CONTENTS

PART I

NON-CONTRADICTION

I THE THEME

II THE CHAIN

III THE TOP AND THE BOTTOM

IV THE IMMOVABLE MOVERS

V THE CLIMAX OF THE D'ANCONIAS

VI THE NON-COMMERCIAL

VII THE EXPLOITERS AND THE EXPLOITED

VIII THE JOHN GALT LINE

IX THE SACRED AND THE PROFANE

X WYATT'S TORCH

PART IIEITHER-OR

I THE MAN WHO BELONGED ON EARTH

II THE ARISTOCRACY OF PULL

III WHITE BLACKMAIL

IV THE SANCTION OF THE VICTIM

V ACCOUNT OVERDRAWN

VI MIRACLE METAL

VII THE MORATORIUM ON BRAINS

VIII BY OUR LOVE

IX THE FACE WITHOUT PAIN OR FEAR OR GUILT

X THE SIGN OF THE DOLLAR

PART III

A IS A

I ATLANTIS

II THE UTOPIA OF GREED

III ANTI-GREED

IV ANTI-LIFE

V THEIR BROTHERS' KEEPERS

VI THE CONCERTO OF DELIVERANCE

VII "THIS IS JOHN GALT SPEAKING"

VIII THE EGOIST

IX THE GENERATOR

X IN THE NAME OF THE BEST WITHIN US

PART I

NON-CONTRADICTION

CHAPTER ITHE THEME

"Who is John Gait?"

The light was ebbing, and Eddie Willers could not distinguish the bum'sface. The bum had said it simply, without expression. But from the sunset farat the end of the street, yellow glints caught his eyes, and the eyes lookedstraight at Eddie Willers, mocking and still—as if the question had beenaddressed to the causeless uneasiness within him.

"Why did you say that?" asked Eddie Willers, his voice tense.

The bum leaned against the side of the doorway; a wedge of broken glassbehind him reflected the metal yellow of the sky.

"Why does it bother you?" he asked.

"It doesn't," snapped Eddie Willers.

He reached hastily into his pocket. The bum had stopped him and asked fora dime, then had gone on talking, as if to kill that moment and postpone theproblem of the next. Pleas for dimes were so frequent in the streets thesedays that it was not necessary to listen to explanations, and he had nodesire to hear the details of this bum's particular despair.

"Go get your cup of coffee," he said, handing the dime to the shadow thathad no face.

"Thank you, sir," said the voice, without interest, and the face leanedforward for a moment. The face was wind-browned, cut by lines of wearinessand cynical resignation; the eyes were intelligent. Eddie Willers walked on,wondering why he always felt it at this time of day, this sense of dreadwithout reason. No, he thought, not dread, there's nothing to fear: just animmense, diffused apprehension, with no source or object. He had becomeaccustomed to the feeling, but he could find no explanation for it; yet thebum had spoken as if he knew that Eddie felt it, as if he thought that oneshould feel it, and more: as if he knew the reason.

Eddie Willers pulled his shoulders straight, in conscientious self-discipline. He had to stop this, he thought; he was beginning to imaginethings. Had he always felt it? He was thirty-two years old. He tried to thinkback. No, he hadn't; but he could not remember when it had started. Thefeeling came to him Suddenly, at random intervals, and now it was coming moreoften than ever. It's the twilight, he thought; I hate the twilight.

The clouds and the shafts of skyscrapers against them were turning brown,like an old painting in oil, the color of a fading masterpiece. Long streaksof grime ran from under the pinnacles down the slender, soot-eaten walls.High on the side of a tower there was a crack in the shape of a motionlesslightning, the length of ten stories. A jagged object cut the sky above theroofs; it was half a spire, still holding the glow of the sunset; the goldleaf had long since peeled off the other half. The glow was red and still,like the reflection of a fire: not an active fire, but a dying one which itis too late to stop.

No, thought Eddie Willers, there was nothing disturbing in the sight ofthe city. It looked as it had always looked.

He walked on, reminding himself that he was late in returning to theoffice. He did not like the task which he had to perform on his return, butit had to be done. So he did not attempt to delay it, but made himself walkfaster.

He turned a corner. In the narrow space between the dark silhouettes oftwo buildings, as in the crack of a door, he saw the page of a giganticcalendar suspended in the sky.

It was the calendar that the mayor of New York had erected last year onthe top of a building, so that citizens might tell the day of the month asthey told the hours of the day, by glancing up at a public tower. A white

rectangle hung over the city, imparting the date to the men in the streetsbelow. In the rusty light of this evening's sunset, the rectangle said:September 2.

Eddie Willers looked away. He had never liked the sight of that calendar.It disturbed him, in a manner he could not explain or define. The feelingseemed to blend with his sense of uneasiness; it had the same quality.

He thought suddenly that there was some phrase, a kind of quotation, thatexpressed what the calendar seemed to suggest. But he could not recall it. Hewalked, groping for a sentence that hung in his mind as an empty shape. Hecould neither fill it nor dismiss it. He glanced back. The white rectanglestood above the roofs, saying in immovable finality: September 2.

Eddie Willers shifted his glance down to the street, to a vegetablepushcart at the stoop of a brownstone house. He saw a pile of bright goldcarrots and the fresh green of onions. He saw a clean white curtain blowingat an open window. He saw a bus turning a corner, expertly steered. Hewondered why he felt reassured—and then, why he felt the sudden, inexplicablewish that these things were not left in the open, unprotected against theempty space above.

When he came to Fifth Avenue, he kept his eyes on the windows of thestores he passed. There was nothing he needed or wished to buy; but he likedto see the display of good?, any goods, objects made by men, to be used bymen. He enjoyed the sight of a prosperous street; not more than every fourthone of the stores was out of business, its windows dark and empty.

He did not know why he suddenly thought of the oak tree. Nothing hadrecalled it. But he thought of it and of his childhood summers on the Taggartestate. He had spent most of his childhood with the Taggart children, and nowhe worked for them, as his father and grandfather had worked for their fatherand grandfather.

The great oak tree had stood on a hill over the Hudson, in a lonely spotof the Taggart estate. Eddie Willers, aged seven, liked to come and look atthat tree. It had stood there for hundreds of years, and he thought it wouldalways stand there. Its roots clutched the hill like a fist with fingers sunkinto the soil, and he thought that if a giant were to seize it by the top, hewould not be able to uproot it, but would swing the hill and the whole of theearth with it, like a ball at the end of a string. He felt safe in the oaktree's presence; it was a thing that nothing could change or threaten; it washis greatest symbol of strength.

One night, lightning struck the oak tree. Eddie saw it the next morning.It lay broken in half, and he looked into its trunk as into the mouth of ablack tunnel. The trunk was only an empty shell; its heart had rotted awaylong ago; there was nothing inside—just a thin gray dust that was beingdispersed by the whim of the faintest wind. The living power had gone, andthe shape it left had not been able to stand without it.

Years later, he heard it said that children should be protected fromshock, from their first knowledge of death, pain or fear. But these had neverscarred him; his shock came when he stood very quietly, looking into theblack hole of the trunk. It was an immense betrayal—the more terrible becausehe could not grasp what it was that had been betrayed. It was not himself, heknew, nor his trust; it was something else. He stood there for a while,making no sound, then he walked back to the house. He never spoke about it toanyone, then or since.

Eddie Willers shook his head, as the screech of a -rusty mechanismchanging a traffic light stopped him on the edge of a curb. He felt anger athimself. There was no reason that he had to remember the oak tree tonight. Itmeant nothing to him any longer, only a faint tinge of sadness—and somewherewithin him, a drop of pain moving briefly and vanishing, like a raindrop onthe glass of a window, its course in the shape of a question mark.

He wanted no sadness attached to his childhood; he loved its memories: anyday of it he remembered now seemed flooded by a still, brilliant sunlight. Itseemed to him as if a few rays from it reached into his present: not rays,more like pinpoint spotlights that gave an occasional moment's glitter to hisjob, to his lonely apartment, to the quiet, scrupulous progression of hisexistence.

He thought of a summer day when he was ten years old. That day, in aclearing of the woods, the one precious companion of his childhood told himwhat they would do when they grew up. The words were harsh and glowing, likethe sunlight. He listened in admiration and in wonder. When he was asked whathe would want to do, he answered at once, "Whatever is right," and added,"You ought to do something great ... I mean, the two of us together.""What?" she asked. He said, "I don't know. That's what we ought to find out.Not just what you said. Not just business and earning a living. Things likewinning battles, or saving people out of fires, or climbing mountains." "Whatfor?" she asked. He said, "The minister said last Sunday that we must alwaysreach for the best within us. What do you suppose is the best within us?" "Idon't know." "We'll have to find out." She did not answer; she was lookingaway, up the railroad track.

Eddie Willers smiled. He had said, "Whatever is right," twenty-two yearsago. He had kept that statement unchallenged ever since; the other questionshad faded in his mind; he had been too busy to ask them. But he still thoughtit self-evident that one had to do what was right; he had never learned howpeople could want to do otherwise; he had learned only that they did. Itstill seemed simple and incomprehensible to him: simple that things should beright, and incomprehensible that they weren't. He knew that they weren't. Hethought of that, as he turned a corner and came to the great building ofTaggart Transcontinental.

The building stood over the street as its tallest and proudest structure.Eddie Willers always smiled at his first sight of it. Its long bands ofwindows were unbroken, in contrast to those of its neighbors. Its risinglines cut the sky, with no crumbling corners or worn edges. It seemed tostand above the years, untouched. It would always stand there, thought EddieWillers.

Whenever he entered the Taggart Building, he felt relief and a sense ofsecurity. This was a place of competence and power. The floors of itshallways were mirrors made of marble. The frosted rectangles of its electricfixtures were chips of solid light. Behind sheets of glass, rows of girls satat typewriters, the clicking of their keys like the sound of speeding trainwheels. And like an answering echo, a faint shudder went through the walls attimes, rising from under the building, from the tunnels of the great terminalwhere trains started out to cross a continent and stopped after crossing itagain, as they had started and stopped for generation after generation.Taggart Transcontinental, thought Eddie Willers, From Ocean to Ocean—theproud slogan of his childhood, so much more shining and holy than anycommandment of the Bible. From Ocean to Ocean, forever—thought Eddie Willers,in the manner of a rededication, as he walked through the spotless halls intothe heart of the building, into the office of James Taggart, President ofTaggart Transcontinental.

James Taggart sat at his desk. He looked like a man approaching fifty, whohad crossed into age from adolescence, without the intermediate stage ofyouth. He had a small, petulant mouth, and thin hair clinging to a baldforehead. His posture had a limp, decentralized sloppiness, as if in defianceof his tall, slender body, a body with an elegance of line intended for theconfident poise of an aristocrat, but transformed into the gawkiness of alout. The flesh of his face was pale and soft. His eyes were pale and veiled,with a glance that moved slowly, never quite stopping, gliding off and past

things in eternal resentment of their existence. He looked obstinate anddrained. He was thirty-nine years old.

He lifted his head with irritation, at the sound of the opening door.

"Don't bother me, don't bother me, don't bother me," said James Taggart.

Eddie Willers walked toward the-desk.

"It's important, Jim," he said, not raising his voice."All right, all right, what is it?"

Eddie Willers looked at a map on the wall of the office. The map's colorshad faded under the glass—he wondered dimly how many Taggart presidents hadsat before it and for how many years. The Taggart Transcontinental Railroad,the network of red lines slashing the faded body of the country from New Yorkto San Francisco, looked like a system of blood vessels. It looked as ifonce, long ago, the blood had shot down the main artery and, under thepressure of its own overabundance, had branched out at random points, runningall over the country. One red streak twisted its way from Cheyenne, Wyoming,down to El Paso, Texas—the Rio Norte Line of Taggart Transcontinental. Newtracing had been added recently and the red streak had been extended southbeyond El Paso—but Eddie Willers turned away hastily when his eyes reachedthat point.

He looked at James Taggart and said, "It's the Rio Norte Line." He noticedTaggart's glance moving down to a corner of the desk. "We've had anotherwreck."

"Railroad accidents happen every day. Did you have to bother me aboutthat?"

"You know what I'm saying, Jim. The Rio Norte is done for. That track isshot. Down the whole line."

"We are getting a new track."

Eddie Willers continued as if there had been no answer: "That track isshot. It's no use trying to run trains down there. People are giving uptrying to use them."

"There is not a railroad in the country, it seems to me, that doesn't havea few branches running at a deficit. We're not the only ones. It's a nationalcondition—a temporary national condition."

Eddie stood looking at him silently. What Taggart disliked about EddieWillers was this habit of looking straight into people's eyes. Eddie's eyeswere blue, wide and questioning; he had blond hair and a square face,unremarkable except for that look of scrupulous attentiveness and open,puzzled wonder.

"What do you want?" snapped Taggart.

"I just came to tell you something you had to know, because somebody hadto tell you."

"That we've had another accident?"

"That we can't give up the Rio Norte Line."

James Taggart seldom raised his head; when he looked at people, he did soby lifting his heavy eyelids and staring upward from under the expanse of hisbald forehead.

"Who's thinking of giving up the Rio Norte Line?" he asked.

"There's never been any question of giving it up. I resent your saying it.I resent it very much."

"But we haven't met a schedule for the last six months. We haven'tcompleted a run without some sort of breakdown, major or minor. We're losingall our shippers, one after another. How long can we last?"

"You're a pessimist, Eddie. You lack faith. That's what undermines themorale of an organization."

"You mean that nothing's going to be done about the Rio Norte Line?"

"I haven't said that at all. Just as soon as we get the new track-"

"Jim, there isn't going to be any new track." He watched Taggart's eyelidsmove up slowly. "I've just come back from the office of Associated Steel.I've spoken to Orren Boyle."

"What did he say?"

"He spoke for an hour and a half and did not give me a single straightanswer."

"What did you bother him for? I believe the first order of rail wasn't duefor delivery until next month."

"And before that, it was due for delivery three months ago."

"Unforeseen circumstances. Absolutely beyond Orren's control."

"And before that, it was due six months earlier. Jim, we have waited forAssociated Steel to deliver that rail for thirteen months."

"What do you want me to do? I can't run Orren Boyle's business."

"I want you to understand that we can't wait."

Taggart asked slowly, his voice half-mocking, half-cautious, "What did mysister say?"

"She won't be back until tomorrow.""Well, what do you want me to do?""That's for you to decide."

"Well, whatever else you say, there's one thing you're not going tomention next—and that's Rearden Steel."

Eddie did not answer at once, then said quietly, "All right, Jim. I won'tmention it."

"Orren is my friend." He heard no answer. "I resent your attitude. OrrenBoyle will deliver that rail just as soon as it's humanly possible. So longas he can't deliver it, nobody can blame us."

"Jim! What are you talking about? Don't you understand that the Rio NorteLine is breaking up—whether anybody blames us or not?"

"People would put up with it—they'd have to—if it weren't for the Phoenix-Durango." He saw Eddie's face tighten. "Nobody ever complained about the RioNorte Line, until the Phoenix-Durango came on the scene."

"The Phoenix-Durango is doing a brilliant job."

"Imagine a thing called the Phoenix-Durango competing with TaggartTranscontinental! It was nothing but a local milk line ten years ago."

"It's got most of the freight traffic of Arizona, New Mexico and Coloradonow." Taggart did not answer. "Jim, we can't lose Colorado. It's our lasthope. It's everybody's last hope. If we don't pull ourselves together, we'lllose every big shipper in the state to the Phoenix-Durango. We've lost theWyatt oil fields."

"I don't see why everybody keeps talking about the Wyatt oil fields."

"Because Ellis Wyatt is a prodigy who—"

"Damn Ellis Wyatt!"

Those oil wells, Eddie thought suddenly, didn't they have something incommon with the blood vessels on the map? Wasn't that the way the red streamof Taggart Transcontinental had shot across the country, years ago, a featthat seemed incredible now? He thought of the oil wells spouting a blackstream that ran over a continent almost faster than the trains of thePhoenix-Durango could carry it. That oil field had been only a rocky patch inthe mountains of Colorado, given up as exhausted long ago. Ellis Wyatt'sfather had managed to squeeze an obscure living to the end of his days, outof the dying oil wells. Now it was as if somebody had given a shot ofadrenalin to the heart of the mountain, the heart had started pumping, theblack blood had burst through the rocks—of course it's blood, thought EddieWillers, because blood is supposed to feed, to give life, and that is whatWyatt Oil had done. It had shocked empty slopes of ground into suddenexistence, it had brought new towns, new power plants, new factories to aregion nobody had ever noticed on any map. New factories, thought Eddie

Willers, at a time when the freight revenues from all the great oldindustries were dropping slowly year by year; a rich new oil field, at a timewhen the pumps were stopping in one famous field after another; a newindustrial state where nobody had expected anything but cattle and beets. Oneman had done it, and he had done it in eight years; this, thought EddieWillers, was like the stories he had read in school books and never quitebelieved, the stories of men who had lived in the days of the country'syouth. He wished he could meet Ellis Wyatt. There was a great deal of talkabout him, but few had ever met him; he seldom came to New York. They said hewas thirty-three years old and had a violent temper. He had discovered someway to revive exhausted oil wells and he had proceeded to revive them.

"Ellis Wyatt is a greedy bastard who's after nothing but money," saidJames Taggart. "It seems to me that there are more important things in lifethan making money."

"What are you talking about, Jim? What has that got to do with—""Besides, he's double-crossed us. We served the Wyatt oil fields foryears, most adequately. In the days of old man Wyatt, we ran a tank train aweek."

"These are not the days of old man Wyatt, Jim. The Phoenix-Durango runstwo tank trains a day down there—and it runs them on schedule.""If he had given us time to grow along with him—""He has no time to waste."

"What does he expect? That we drop all our other shippers, sacrifice theinterests of the whole country and give him all our trains?"

"Why, no. He doesn't expect anything. He just deals with the Phoenix-Durango . "

"I think he's a destructive, unscrupulous ruffian. I think he's anirresponsible upstart who's been grossly overrated." It was astonishing tohear a sudden emotion in James Taggart's lifeless voice. "I'm not so surethat his oil fields are such a beneficial achievement. It seems to me thathe's dislocated the economy of the whole country. Nobody expected Colorado tobecome an industrial state. How can we have any security or plan anything ifeverything changes all the time?"

"Good God, Jim! He's-"

"Yes, I know, I know, he's making money. But that is not the standard, itseems to me, by which one gauges a man's value to society. And as for hisoil, he'd come crawling to us. and he'd wait his turn along with all theother shippers, and he wouldn't demand more than his fair share oftransportation—if it weren't for the Phoenix-Durango. We can't help it ifwe're up against destructive competition of that kind. Nobody can blame us."

The pressure in his chest and temples, thought Eddie Willers, was thestrain of the effort he was making; he had decided to make the issue clearfor once, and the issue was so clear, he thought, that nothing could bar itfrom Taggart's understanding, unless it was the failure of his ownpresentation. So he had tried hard, but he was failing, just as he had alwaysfailed in all of their discussions; no matter what he said, they never seemedto be talking about the same subject.

"Jim, what are you saying? Does it matter that nobody blames us—when theroad is falling apart?"

James Taggart smiled; it was a thin smile, amused and cold. "It'stouching, Eddie," he said. "It's touching—your devotion to TaggartTranscontinental. If you don't look out, you'll turn into one of those realfeudal serfs."

"That's what I am, Jim."

"But may I ask whether it is your job to discuss these matters with me?""No, it isn't."

"Then why don't you learn that we have departments to take care of things?Why don't you report all this to whoever's concerned? Why don't you cry on mydear sister's shoulder?"

"Look. Jim, I know it's not my place to talk to you. But I can'tunderstand what's going on. I don't know what it is that your proper adviserstell you, or why they can't make you understand. So I thought I'd try to tellyou myself."

"I appreciate our childhood friendship, Eddie, but do you think that thatshould entitle you to walk in here unannounced whenever you wish? Consideringyour own rank, shouldn't you remember that I am president of TaggartTranscontinental?"

This was wasted. Eddie Willers looked at him as usual, not hurt, merelypuzzled, and asked, "Then you don't intend to do anything about the Rio NorteLine?"

"I haven't said that. I haven't said that at all." Taggart was looking atthe map, at the red streak south of El Paso. "Just as soon as the SanSebastian Mines get going and our Mexican branch begins to pay off—"

"Don't let's talk about that, Jim." Taggart turned, startled by theunprecedented phenomenon of an implacable anger in Eddie's voice. "What's thematter?"

"You know what's the matter. Your sister said—""Damn my sister!" said James Taggart.

Eddie Willers did not move. He did not answer. He stood looking straightahead. But he did not see James Taggart or anything in the office.After a moment, he bowed and walked out.

In the anteroom, the clerks of James Taggart's personal staff wereswitching off the lights, getting ready to leave for the day. But Pop Harper,chief clerk, still sat at his desk, twisting the levers of a half-dismemberedtypewriter. Everybody in the company had the impression that Pop Harper wasborn in that particular corner at that particular desk and never intended toleave it. He had been chief clerk for James Taggart's father.

Pop Harper glanced up at Eddie Willers as he came out of the president'soffice. It was a wise, slow glance; it seemed to say that he knew thatEddie's visit to their part of the building meant trouble on the line, knewthat nothing had come of the visit, and was completely indifferent to theknowledge. It was the cynical indifference which Eddie Willers had seen inthe eyes of the bum on the street corner.

"Say, Eddie, know where I could get some woolen undershirts?" he asked,"Tried all over town, but nobody's got 'em."

"I don't know," said Eddie, stopping. "Why do you ask me?"

"I just ask everybody. Maybe somebody'!! tell me."

Eddie looked uneasily at the blank, emaciated face and white hair."It's cold in this joint," said Pop Harper. "It's going to be colder thiswinter."

"What are you doing?" Eddie asked, pointing at the pieces of typewriter.

"The damn thing's busted again. No use sending it out, took them threemonths to fix it the last time. Thought I'd patch it up myself. Not for long,I guess." He let his fist drop down on the keys. "You're ready for the junkpile, old pal. Your days are numbered."

Eddie started. That was the sentence he had tried to remember: Your daysare numbered. But he had forgotten in what connection he had tried toremember it.

"It's no use, Eddie," said Pop Harper.

"What's no use?"

"Nothing. Anything."

"What's the matter, Pop?"

"I'm not going to requisition a new typewriter. The new ones are made oftin. When the old ones go, that will be the end of typewriting. There was anaccident in the subway this morning, their brakes wouldn't work. You ought togo home, Eddie, turn on the radio and listen to a good dance band. Forget it,boy. Trouble with you is you never had a hobby. Somebody stole the electriclight bulbs again, from off the staircase, down where I live. I've got a painin my chest. Couldn't get any cough drops this morning, the drugstore on ourcorner went bankrupt last week. The Texas-Western Railroad went bankrupt lastmonth. They closed the Queensborough Bridge yesterday for temporary repairs.Oh well, what's the use? Who is John Gait?"

-k -k -k

She sat at the window of the train, her head thrown back, one legstretched across to the empty seat before her. The window frame trembled withthe speed of the motion, the pane hung over empty darkness, and dots of lightslashed across the glass as luminous streaks, once in a while.

Her leg, sculptured by the tight sheen of the stocking, its long linerunning straight, over an arched instep, to the tip of a foot in a high-heeled pump, had a feminine elegance that seemed out of place in the dustytrain car and oddly incongruous with the rest of her. She wore a batteredcamel's hair coat that had been expensive, wrapped shapelessly about herslender, nervous body. The coat collar was raised to the slanting brim of herhat. A sweep of brown hair fell back, almost touching the line of hershoulders. Her face was made of angular planes, the shape of her mouth clear-cut, a sensual mouth held closed with inflexible precision. She kept herhands in the coat pockets, her posture taut, as if she resented immobility,and unfeminine, as if she were unconscious of her own body and that it was awoman's body. She sat listening to the music. It was a symphony of triumph.The notes flowed up, they spoke of rising and they were the rising itself,they were the essence and the form of upward motion, they seemed to embodyevery human act and thought that had ascent as its motive. It was a sunburstof sound, breaking out of hiding and spreading open. It had the freedom ofrelease and the tension of purpose. It swept space clean, and left nothingbut the joy of an unobstructed effort. Only a faint echo within the soundsspoke of that from which the music had escaped, but spoke in laughingastonishment at the discovery that there was no ugliness or pain, and therenever had had to be. It was the song of an immense deliverance.

She thought: For just a few moments—while this lasts—it is all right tosurrender completely—to forget everything and just permit yourself to feel.She thought: Let go—drop the controls—this is it.

Somewhere on the edge of her mind, under the music, she heard the sound oftrain wheels. They knocked in an even rhythm, every fourth knock accented, asif stressing a conscious purpose. She could relax, because she heard thewheels. She listened to the symphony, thinking: This is why the wheels haveto be kept going, and this is where they're going.

She had never heard that symphony before, but she knew that it was writtenby Richard Halley. She recognized the violence and the magnificent intensity.She recognized the style of the theme; it was a clear, complex melody—at atime when no one wrote melody any longer. . . . She sat looking up at theceiling of the car, but she did not see it and she had forgotten where shewas. She did not know whether she was hearing a full symphony orchestra oronly the theme; perhaps she was hearing the orchestration in her own mind.

She thought dimly that there had been premonitory echoes of this theme inall of Richard Halley's work, through all the years of his long struggle, tothe day, in his middle-age, when fame struck him suddenly and knocked himout. This—she thought, listening to the symphony— had been the goal of his

struggle. She remembered half-hinted attempts in his music, phrases thatpromised it, broken bits of melody that started but never quite reached it;when Richard Halley wrote this, he . . . She sat up straight. When didRichard Halley write this?

In the same instant, she realized where she was and wondered for the firsttime where that music came from.

A few steps away, at the end of the car, a brakeman was adjusting thecontrols of the air-conditioner. He was blond and young. He was whistling thetheme of the symphony. She realized that he had been whistling it for sometime and that this was all she had heard.

She watched him incredulously for a while, before she raised her voice toask, "Tell me please, what are you whistling?"

The boy turned to her. She met a direct glance and saw an open, eagersmile, as if he were sharing a confidence with a friend. She liked his face-its lines were tight and firm, it did not have that look of loose musclesevading the responsibility of a shape, which she had learned to expect inpeople's faces.

"It's the Halley Concerto," he answered, smiling.

"Which one?"

"The Fifth."

She let a moment pass, before she said slowly and very carefully, "RichardHalley wrote only four concertos."

The boy's smile vanished. It was as if he were jolted back to reality,just as she had been a few moments ago. It was as if a shutter were slammeddown, and what remained was a face without expression, impersonal,indifferent and empty.

"Yes, of course," he said. "I'm wrong. I made a mistake."

"Then what was it?"

"Something I heard somewhere."

"What?"

"I don't know."

"Where did you hear it?"

"I don't remember."

She paused helplessly; he was turning away from her without furtherinterest.

"It sounded like a Halley theme," she said. "But I know every note he'sever written and he never wrote that."

There was still no expression, only a faint look of attentiveness on theboy's face, as he turned back to her and asked, "You like the music ofRichard Halley?"

"Yes," she said, "I like it very much."

He considered her for a moment, as if hesitating, then he turned away. Shewatched the expert efficiency of his movements as he went on working. Heworked in silence.

She had not slept for two nights, but she could not permit herself tosleep; she had too many problems to consider and not much time: the train wasdue in New York early in the morning. She needed the time, yet she wished thetrain would go faster; but it was the Taggart Comet, the fastest train in thecountry.

She tried to think; but the music remained on the edge of her mind and shekept hearing it, in full chords, like the implacable steps of something thatcould not be stopped. . . . She shook her head angrily, jerked her hat offand lighted a cigarette.

She would not sleep, she thought; she could last until tomorrow night. . .. The train wheels clicked in accented rhythm. She was so used to them thatshe did not hear them consciously, but the sound became a sense of peacewithin her. . . . When she extinguished her cigarette, she knew that she

needed another one, but thought that she would give herself a minute, just afew minutes, before she would light it. . . .

She had fallen asleep and she awakened with a jolt, knowing that somethingwas wrong, before she knew what it was: the wheels had stopped. The car stoodsoundless and dim in the blue glow of the night lamps. She glanced at herwatch: there was no reason for stopping. She looked out the window: the trainstood still in the middle of empty fields.

She heard someone moving in a seat across the aisle, and asked, "How longhave we been standing?"

A man's voice answered indifferently, "About an hour." The man lookedafter her, sleepily astonished, because she leaped to her feet and rushed tothe door. There was a cold wind outside, and an empty stretch of land underan empty sky. She heard weeds rustling in the darkness. Far ahead, she sawthe figures of men standing by the engine—and above them, hanging detached inthe sky, the red light of a signal.

She walked rapidly toward them, past the motionless line of wheels. No onepaid attention to her when she approached. The train crew and a fewpassengers stood clustered under the red light. They had stopped talking,they seemed to be waiting in placid indifference.

"What's the matter?" she asked.

The engineer turned, astonished. Her question had sounded like an order,not like the amateur curiosity of a passenger. She stood, hands in pockets,coat collar raised, the wind beating her hair in strands across her face.

"Red light, lady," he said, pointing up with his thumb.

"How long has it been on?"

"An hour."

"We're off the main track, aren't we?"

"That's right."

"Why?"

"I don't know."

The conductor spoke up. "I don't think we had any business being sent offon a siding, that switch wasn't working right, and this thing's not workingat all." He jerked his head up at the red light. "I don't think the signal'sgoing to change. I think it's busted."

"Then what are you doing?"

"Waiting for it to change."

In her pause of startled anger, the fireman chuckled. "Last week, thecrack special of the Atlantic Southern got left on a siding for two hours-just somebody's mistake."

"This is the Taggart Comet," she said. "The Comet has never been late."

"She's the only one in the country that hasn't," said the engineer.

"There's always a first time," said the fireman.

"You don't know about railroads, lady," said a passenger.

"There's not a signal system or a dispatcher in the country that's worth adamn."

She did not turn or notice him, but spoke to the engineer.

"If you know that the signal is broken, what do you intend to do?"

He did not like her tone of authority, and he could not understand why sheassumed it so naturally. She looked like a young girl; only her mouth andeyes showed that she was a woman in her thirties. The dark gray eyes weredirect and disturbing, as if they cut through things, throwing theinconsequential out of the way. The face seemed faintly familiar to him, buthe could not recall where he had seen it.

"Lady, I don't intend to stick my neck out," he said.

"He means," said the fireman, "that our job's to wait for orders."

"Your job is to run this train."

"Not against a red light. If the light says stop, we stop."

Terminal in New York; it was Owen Kellogg who ran the Terminal. She hadwatched his work for some time; she had always looked for sparks ofcompetence, like a diamond prospector in an unpromising wasteland. Kelloggwas still too young to be made superintendent of a division; she had wantedto give him another year, but there was no time to wait. She would have tospeak to him as soon as she returned.

The strip of earth, faintly visible outside the window, was running fasternow, blending into a gray stream. Through the dry phrases of calculations inher mind, she noticed that she did have time to feel something: it was thehard, exhilarating pleasure of action.

-k -k -k

With the first whistling rush of air, as the Comet plunged into thetunnels of the Taggart Terminal under the city of New York, Dagny Taggart satup straight. She always felt it when the train went underground—this sense ofeagerness, of hope and of secret excitement. It was as if normal existencewere a photograph of shapeless things in badly printed colors, but this was asketch done in a few sharp strokes that made things seem clean, important—andworth doing.

She watched the tunnels as they flowed past: bare walls of concrete, a netof pipes and wires, a web of rails that went off into black holes where greenand red lights hung as distant drops of color. There was nothing else,nothing to dilute it, so that one could admire naked purpose and theingenuity that had achieved it. She thought of the Taggart Building standingabove her head at this moment, growing straight to the sky, and she thought:These are the roots of the building, hollow roots twisting under the ground,feeding the city.

When the train stopped, when she got off and heard the concrete of theplatform under her heels, she felt light, lifted, impelled to action.

She started off, walking fast, as if the speed of her steps could giveform to the things she felt. It was a few moments before she realized thatshe was whistling a piece of music—and that it was the theme of Halley'sFifth Concerto. She felt someone looking at her and turned. The youngbrakeman stood watching her tensely.

She sat on the arm of the big chair facing James Taggart's desk, her coatthrown open over a wrinkled traveling suit. Eddie Willers sat across theroom, making notes once in a while. His title was that of Special Assistantto the Vice-President in Charge of Operation, and his main duty was to be herbodyguard against any waste of time. She asked him to be present atinterviews of this nature, because then she never had to explain anything tohim afterwards. James Taggart sat at his desk, his head drawn into hisshoulders.

"The Rio Norte Line is a pile of junk from one end to the other," shesaid. "It's much worse than I thought. But we're going to save it.""Of course," said James Taggart.

"Some of the rail can be salvaged. Not much and not for long. We'll startlaying new rail in the mountain sections, Colorado first. We'll get the newrail in two months."

"Oh, did Orren Boyle say he'll-"

"I've ordered the rail from Rearden Steel."

The slight, choked sound from Eddie Willers was his suppressed desire tocheer.

James Taggart did not answer at once. "Dagny, why don't you sit in thechair as one is supposed to?" he said at last; his voice was petulant."Nobody holds business conferences this way.""I do."

She waited. He asked, his eyes avoiding hers, "Did you say that you haveordered the rail from Rearden?"

"Yesterday evening. I phoned him from Cleveland."

"But the Board hasn't authorized it. I haven't authorized it. You haven'tconsulted me."

She reached over, picked up the receiver of a telephone on his desk andhanded it to him.

"Call Rearden and cancel it," she said.

James Taggart moved back in his chair. "I haven't said that," he answeredangrily. "I haven't said that at all.""Then it stands?""I haven't said that, either."

She turned. "Eddie, have them draw up the contract with Rearden Steel. Jimwill sign it." She took a crumpled piece of notepaper from her pocket andtossed it to Eddie. "There's the figures and terms."

Taggart said, "But the Board hasn't—"

"The Board hasn't anything to do with it. They authorized you to buy therail thirteen months ago. Where you buy it is up to you."

"I don't think it's proper to make such a decision without giving theBoard a chance to express an opinion. And I don't see why I should be made totake the responsibility."

"I am taking it."

"What about the expenditure which—"

"Rearden is charging less than Orren Boyle's Associated Steel.""Yes, and what about Orren Boyle?"

"I've cancelled the contract. We had the right to cancel it six monthsago. "

"When did you do that?""Yesterday."

"But he hasn't called to have me confirm it.""He won't."

Taggart sat looking down at his desk. She wondered why he resented thenecessity of dealing with Rearden, and why his resentment had such an odd,evasive quality. Rearden Steel had been the chief supplier of TaggartTranscontinental for ten years, ever since the first Rearden furnace wasfired, in the days when their father was president of the railroad. For tenyears, most of their rail had come from Rearden Steel. There were not manyfirms in the country who delivered what was ordered, when and as ordered.Rearden Steel was one of them.

If she were insane, thought Dagny, she would conclude that her brotherhated to deal with Rearden because Rearden did his job with superlativeefficiency; but she would not conclude it, because she thought that such afeeling was not within the humanly possible.

"It isn't fair," said James Taggart.

"What isn't?"

"That we always give all our business to Rearden. It seems to me we shouldgive somebody else a chance, too. Rearden doesn't need us; he's plenty bigenough. We ought to help the smaller fellows to develop. Otherwise, we'rejust encouraging a monopoly."

"Don't talk tripe, Jim,"

"Why do we always have to get things from Rearden?""Because we always get them.""I don't like Henry Rearden."

"I do. But what does that matter, one way or the other? We need rails andhe's the only one who can give them to us."

"The human element is very important. You have no sense of the humanelement at all."

"We're talking about saving a railroad, Jim."

"Yes, of course, of course, but still, you haven't any sense of the humanelement."

"No. I haven't."

"If we give Rearden such a large order for steel rails—""They're not going to be steel. They're Rearden Metal."

She had always avoided personal reactions, but she was forced to break herrule when she saw the expression on Taggart's face. She burst out laughing.

Rearden Metal was a new alloy, produced by Rearden after ten years ofexperiments. He had placed it on the market recently. He had received noorders and had found no customers.

Taggart could not understand the transition from the laughter to thesudden tone of Dagny's voice; the voice was cold and harsh: "Drop it, Jim. Iknow everything you're going to say. Nobody's ever used it before. Nobodyapproves of Rearden Metal. Nobody's interested in it. Nobody wants it. Still,our rails are going to be made of Rearden Metal."

"But ..." said Taggart, "but . . . but nobody's ever used it before!"

He observed, with satisfaction, that she was silenced by anger. He likedto observe emotions; they were like red lanterns strung along the darkunknown of another's personality, marking vulnerable points. But how onecould feel a personal emotion about a metal alloy, and what such an emotionindicated, was incomprehensible to him; so he could make no use of hisdiscovery.

"The consensus of the best metallurgical authorities," he said, "seems tobe highly skeptical about Rearden Metal, contending—""Drop it, Jim."

"Well, whose opinion did you take?""I don't ask for opinions.""What do you go by?""Judgment."

"Well, whose judgment did you take?""Mine."

"But whom did you consult about it?""Nobody."

"Then what on earth do you know about Rearden Metal?""That it's the greatest thing ever put on the market.""Why?"

"Because it's tougher than steel, cheaper than steel and will outlast anyhunk of metal in existence.""But who says so?"

"Jim, I studied engineering in college. When I see things, I see them.""What did you see?"

"Rearden's formula and the tests he showed me."

"Well, if it were any good, somebody would have used it, and nobody has."He saw the flash of anger, and went on nervously: "How can you know it'sgood? How can you be sure? How can you decide?"

"Somebody decides such things, Jim. Who?"

"Well, I don't see why we have to be the first ones. I don't see it atall."

"Do you want to save the Rio Norte Line or not?" He did not answer, "Ifthe road could afford it, I would scrap every piece of rail over the wholesystem and replace it with Rearden Metal. All of it needs replacing. None ofit will last much longer. But we can't afford it. We have to get out of a badhole, first. Do you want us to pull through or not?"

"We're still the best railroad in the country. The others are doing muchworse."

"Then do you want us to remain in the hole?"

"I haven't said that! Why do you always oversimplify things that way? Andif you're worried about money, I don't see why you want to waste it on theRio Norte Line, when the Phoenix-Durango has robbed us of all our businessdown there. Why spend money when we have no protection against a competitorwho'll destroy our investment?"

"Because the Phoenix-Durango is an excellent railroad, but I intend tomake the Rio Norte Line better than that. Because I'm going to beat thePhoenix-Durango, if necessary—only it won't be necessary, because there willbe room for two or three railroads to make fortunes in Colorado. Because I'dmortgage the system to build a branch to any district around Ellis Wyatt."

"I'm sick of hearing about Ellis Wyatt."

He did not like the way her eyes moved to look at him and remained still,looking, for a moment.

"I don't see any need for immediate action," he said; he sounded offended."Just what do you consider so alarming in the present situation of TaggartTranscontinental?"

"The consequences of your policies, Jim."

"Which policies?"

"That thirteen months' experiment with Associated Steel, for one. YourMexican catastrophe, for another."

"The Board approved the Associated Steel contract," he said hastily.

"The Board voted to build the San Sebastian Line. Besides, I don't see whyyou call it a catastrophe."

"Because the Mexican government is going to nationalize your line any daynow. "

"That's a lie!" His voice was almost a scream. "That's nothing but viciousrumors! I have it on very good inside authority that—"

"Don't show that you're scared, Jim," she said contemptuously. He did notanswer. "It's no use getting panicky about it now," she said. "All we can dois try to cushion the blow. It's going to be a bad blow. Forty milliondollars is a loss from which we won't recover easily. But Taggarttranscontinental has withstood many bad shocks in the past. I'll see to itthat it withstands this one."

"I refuse to consider, I absolutely refuse to consider the possibility ofthe San Sebastian Line being nationalized!"

"All right. Don't consider it."

She remained silent. He said defensively, "I don't see why you're so eagerto give a chance to Ellis Wyatt, yet you think it's wrong to take part indeveloping an underprivileged country that never had a chance."

"Ellis Wyatt is not asking anybody to give him a chance. And I'm not inbusiness to give chances. I'm running a railroad."

"That's an extremely narrow view, it seems to me. I don't see why weshould want to help one man instead of a whole nation."

"I'm not interested in. helping anybody. I want to make money."

"That's an impractical attitude. Selfish greed for profit is a thing ofthe past. It has been generally conceded that the interests of society as awhole must always be placed first in any business undertaking which—"

"How long do you intend to talk in order to evade the issue, Jim?"

"What issue?"

"The order for Rearden Metal."

He did not answer. He sat studying her silently. Her slender body, aboutto slump from exhaustion, was held erect by the straight line of theshoulders, and the shoulders were held by a conscious effort of will. Fewpeople liked her face: the face was too cold, the eyes too intense; nothingcould ever lend her the charm of a soft focus. The beautiful legs, slantingdown from the chair's arm in the center of his vision, annoyed him; theyspoiled the rest of his estimate.

She remained silent; he was forced to ask, "Did you decide to order itjust like that, on the spur of the moment, over a telephone?"

"I decided it six months ago. I was waiting for Hank Rearden to get readyto go into production."

"Don't call him Hank Rearden. It's vulgar."

"That's what everybody calls him. Don't change the subject.""Why did you have to telephone him last night?""Couldn't reach him sooner."

"Why didn't you wait until you got back to New York and—""Because I had seen the Rio Norte Line."

"Well, I need time to consider it, to place the matter before the Board,to consult the best—""There is no time."

"You haven't given me a chance to form an opinion."

"I don't give a damn about your opinion. I am not going to argue with you,with your Board or with your professors. You have a choice to make and you'regoing to make it now. Just say yes or no."

"That's a preposterous, high-handed, arbitrary way of—"

"Yes or no?"

"That's the trouble with you. You always make it 'Yes' or 'No.' Things arenever absolute like that. Nothing is absolute."

"Metal rails are. Whether we get them or not, is."She waited. He did not answer. "Well?" she asked."Are you taking the responsibility for it?""I am."

"Go ahead," he said, and added, "but at your own risk. I won't cancel it,but I won't commit myself as to what I'll say to the Board.""Say anything you wish."

She rose to go. He leaned forward across the desk, reluctant to end theinterview and to end it so decisively.

"You realize, of course, that a lengthy procedure will be necessary to putthis through," he said; the words sounded almost hopeful. "It isn't as simpleas that."

"Oh sure," she said. "I'll send you a detailed report, which Eddie willprepare and which you won't read. Eddie will help you put it through theworks. I'm going to Philadelphia tonight to see Rearden. He and I have a lotof work to do." She added, "It's as simple as that, Jim."

She had turned to go, when he spoke again—and what he said seemedbewilderingly irrelevant. "That's all right for you, because you're lucky.Others can't do it."

"Do what?"

"Other people are human. They're sensitive. They can't devote their wholelife to metals and engines. You're lucky—you've never had any feelings.You've never felt anything at all."

As she looked at him, her dark gray eyes went slowly from astonishment tostillness, then to a strange expression that resembled a look of weariness,except that it seemed to reflect much more than the endurance of this onemoment.

"No, Jim," she said quietly, "I guess I've never felt anything at all."Eddie Willers followed her to her office. Whenever she returned, he felt asif the world became clear, simple, easy to face—and he forgot his moments ofshapeless apprehension. He was the only person who found it completelynatural that she should be the Operating Vice-President of a great railroad,even though she was a woman. She had told him, when he was ten years old,that she would run the railroad some day. It did not astonish him now, justas it had not astonished him that day in a clearing of the woods.

When they entered her office, when he saw her sit down at the desk andglance at the memos he had left for her—he felt as he did in his car when themotor caught on and the wheels could move forward.

He was about to leave her office, when he remembered a matter he had notreported. "Owen Kellogg of the Terminal Division has asked me for anappointment to see you," he said.

She looked up, astonished. "That's funny. I was going to send for him.Have him come up. I want to see him. . . . Eddie," she added suddenly,"before I start, tell them to get me Ayers of the Ayers Music PublishingCompany on the phone."

"The Music Publishing Company?" he repeated incredulously.

"Yes. There's something I want to ask him."

When the voice of Mr. Ayers, courteously eager, inquired of what servicehe could be to her, she asked, "Can you tell me whether Richard Halley haswritten a new piano concerto, the Fifth?"

"A fifth concerto, Miss Taggart? Why, no, of course he hasn't."

"Are you sure?"

"Quite sure, Miss Taggart. He has not written anything for eight years.""Is he still alive?"

"Why, yes—that is, I can't say for certain, he has dropped out of publiclife entirely—but I'm sure we would have heard of it if he had died.""If he wrote anything, would you know about it?"

"Of course. We would be the first to know. We publish all of his work. Buthe has stopped writing.""I see. Thank you."

When Owen Kellogg entered her office, she looked at him with satisfaction.She was glad to see that she had been right in her vague recollection of hisappearance—his face had the same quality as that of the young brakeman on thetrain, the face of the kind of man with whom she could deal.

"Sit down, Mr. Kellogg," she said, but he remained standing in front ofher desk.

"You had asked me once to let you know if I ever decided to change myemployment, Miss Taggart," he said. "So I came to tell you that I amquitting."

She had expected anything but that; it took her a moment before she askedquietly, "Why?"

"For a personal reason.""Were you dissatisfied here?""No. "

"Have you received a better offer?""No. "

"What railroad are you going to?"

"I'm not going to any railroad, Miss Taggart."

"Then what job are you taking?"

"I have not decided that yet."

She studied him, feeling slightly uneasy. There was no hostility in hisface; he looked straight at her, he answered simply, directly; he spoke likeone who has nothing to hide, or to show; the face was polite and empty.

"Then why should you wish to quit?"

"It's a personal matter."

"Are you ill? Is it a question of your health?""No. "

"Are you leaving the city?""No. "

"Have you inherited money that permits you to retire?""No. "

"Do you intend to continue working for a living?"

"Yes."

"But you do not wish to work for Taggart Transcontinental?""No. "

"In that case, something must have happened here to cause your decision.What?"

"Nothing, Miss Taggart."

"I wish you'd tell me. I have a reason for wanting to know.""Would you take my word for it, Miss Taggart?""Yes."

"No person, matter or event connected with my job here had any bearingupon my decision."

"You have no specific complaint against Taggart Transcontinental?""None."

"Then I think you might reconsider when you hear what I have to offeryou. "

"I'm sorry, Miss Taggart. I can't.""May I tell you what I have in mind?""Yes, if you wish."

"Would you take my word for it that I decided to offer you the post I'mgoing to offer, before you asked to see me? I want you to know that.""I will always take your word, Miss Taggart."

"It's the post of Superintendent of the Ohio Division. It's yours, if youwant it."

His face showed no reaction, as if the words had no more significance forhim than for a savage who had never heard of railroads."I don't want it, Miss Taggart," he answered.

After a moment, she said, her voice tight, "Write your own ticket,Kellogg. Name your price, I want you to stay. I can match anything any otherrailroad offers you."

"I am not going to work for any other railroad."

"I thought you loved your work."

This was the first sign of emotion in him, just a slight widening of hiseyes and an oddly quiet emphasis in his voice when he answered, "I do."

"Then tell me what it is that I should say in order to hold you!" It hadbeen involuntary and so obviously frank that he looked at her as if it hadreached him.

"Perhaps I am being unfair by coming here to tell you that I'm quitting,Miss Taggart. I know that you asked me to tell you because you wanted to havea chance to make me a counter-offer. So if I came, it looks as if I'm open toa deal. But I'm not. I came only because I ... I wanted to keep my word toyou. "

That one break in his voice was like a sudden flash that told her how muchher interest and her request had meant to him; and that his decision had notbeen an easy one to make.

"Kellogg, is there nothing I can offer you?" she asked.

"Nothing, Miss Taggart. Nothing on earth."

He turned to go. For the first time in her life, she felt helpless andbeaten.

"Why?" she asked, not addressing him.

He stopped. He shrugged and smiled—he was alive for a moment and it wasthe strangest smile she had ever seen: it held secret amusement, andheartbreak, and an infinite bitterness. He answered: "Who is John Gait?"

CHAPTER IITHE CHAIN

It began with a few lights. As a train of the Taggart line rolled towardPhiladelphia, a few brilliant, scattered lights appeared in the darkness;they seemed purposeless in the empty plain, yet too powerful to have nopurpose. The passengers watched them idly, without interest.

The black shape of a structure came next, barely visible against the sky,then a big building, close to the tracks; the building was dark, and thereflections of the train lights streaked across the solid glass of its walls.

An oncoming freight train hid the view, filling the windows with a rushingsmear of noise. In a sudden break above the fiat cars, the passengers sawdistant structures under a faint, reddish glow in the sky; the glow moved inirregular spasms, as if the structures were breathing.

When the freight train vanished, they saw angular buildings wrapped incoils of steam. The rays of a few strong lights cut straight sheafs throughthe coils. The steam was red as the sky.

The thing that came next did not look like a building, but like a shell ofcheckered glass enclosing girders, cranes and trusses in a solid, blinding,orange spread of flame.

The passengers could not grasp the complexity of what seemed to be a citystretched for miles, active without sign of human presence. They saw towersthat looked like contorted skyscrapers, bridges hanging in mid-air, andsudden wounds spurting fire from out of solid walls. They saw a line ofglowing cylinders moving through the night; the cylinders were red-hot metal.

An office building appeared, close to the tracks. The big neon sign on itsroof lighted the interiors of the coaches as they went by. It said: REARDENSTEEL.

A passenger, who was a professor of economics, remarked to his companion:"Of what importance is an individual in the titanic collective achievementsof our industrial age?" Another, who was a journalist, made a note for futureuse in his column: "Hank Rearden is the kind of man who sticks his name oneverything he touches. You may, from this, form your own opinion about thecharacter of Hank Rearden."

The train was speeding on into the darkness when a red gasp shot to thesky from behind a long structure. The passengers paid no attention; one moreheat of steel being poured was not an event they had been taught to notice.

It was the first heat for the first order of Rearden Metal.

To the men at the tap-hole of the furnace inside the mills, the firstbreak of the liquid metal into the open came as a shocking sensation ofmorning. The narrow streak pouring through space had the pure white color ofsunlight. Black coils of steam were boiling upward, streaked with violentred. Fountains of sparks shot in beating spasms, as from broken arteries. Theair seemed torn to rags, reflecting a raging flame that was not there, redblotches whirling and running through space, as if not to be contained withina man-made structure, as if about to consume the columns, the girders, thebridges of cranes overhead. But the liquid metal had no aspect of violence.It was a long white curve with the texture of satin and the friendly radianceof a smile. It flowed obediently through a spout of clay, with two brittleborders to restrain it. It fell through twenty feet of space, down into aladle that held two hundred tons. A flow of stars hung above the stream,leaping out of its placid smoothness, looking delicate as lace and innocentas children's sparklers.

Only at a closer glance could one notice that the white satin was boiling.Splashes flew out at times and fell to the ground below: they were metal and,cooling while hitting the soil, they burst into flame.

Two hundred tons of a metal which was to be harder than steel, runningliquid at a temperature of four thousand degrees, had the power to annihilateevery wall of the structure and every one of the men who worked by thestream. But every inch of its course, every pound of its pressure and thecontent of every molecule within it, were controlled and made by a consciousintention that had worked upon it for ten years.

Swinging through the darkness of the shed, the red glare kept stashing theface of a man who stood in a distant corner; he stood leaning against acolumn, watching. The glare cut a moment's wedge across his eyes, which hadthe color and quality of pale blue ice—then across the black web of the metalcolumn and the ash-blond strands of his hair— then across the belt of histrenchcoat and the pockets where he held his hands. His body was tall andgaunt; he had always been too tall for those around him. His face was cut byprominent cheekbones and by a few sharp lines; they were not the lines ofage, he had always had them: this had made him look old at twenty, and youngnow, at forty-five.

Ever since he could remember, he had been told that his face was ugly,because it was unyielding, and cruel, because it was expressionless. Itremained expressionless now, as he looked at the metal. He was Hank Rearden.

The metal came rising to the top of the ladle and went running over witharrogant prodigality. Then the blinding white trickles turned to glowingbrown, and in one more instant they were black icicles of metal, starting tocrumble off. The slag was crusting in thick, brown ridges that looked likethe crust of the earth. As the crust grew thicker, a few craters broke open,with the white liquid still boiling within.

A man came riding through the air, in the cab of a crane overhead. Hepulled a lever by the casual movement of one hand: steel hooks came down on achain, seized the handles of the ladle, lifted it smoothly like a bucket ofmilk—and two hundred tons of metal went sailing through space toward a row ofmolds waiting to be filled.

Hank Rearden leaned back, closing his eyes. He felt the column tremblingwith the rumble of the crane. The job was done, he thought.

A worker saw him and grinned in understanding, like a fellow accomplice ina great celebration, who knew why that tall, blond figure had to be presenthere tonight. Rearden smiled in answer: it was the only salute he hadreceived. Then he started back for his office, once again a figure with anexpressionless face.

It was late when Hank Rearden left his office that night to walk from hismills to his house. It was a walk of some miles through empty country, but hehad felt like doing it, without conscious reason.

He walked, keeping one hand in his pocket, his fingers closed about abracelet. It was made of Rearden Metal, in the shape of a chain. His fingersmoved, feeling its texture once in a while. It had taken ten years to makethat bracelet. Ten years, he thought, is a long time. The road was dark,edged with trees. Looking up, he could see a few leaves against the stars;the leaves were twisted and dry, ready to fall.

There were distant lights in the windows of houses scattered through thecountryside; but the lights made the road seem lonelier.

He never felt loneliness except when he was happy. He turned, once in awhile, to look back at the red glow of the sky over the mills. He did notthink of the ten years. What remained of them tonight was only a feelingwhich he could not name, except that it was quiet and solemn. The feeling wasa sum, and he did not have to count again the parts that had gone to make it.But the parts, unrecalled, were there, within the feeling. They were thenights spent at scorching ovens in the research laboratory of the mills—thenights spent in the workshop of his home, over sheets of paper which hefilled with formulas, then tore up in angry failure—the days when the young

scientists of the small staff he had chosen to assist him waited forinstructions like soldiers ready for a hopeless battle, having exhaustedtheir ingenuity, still willing, but silent, with the unspoken sentencehanging in the air: "Mr. Rearden, it can't be done—"—the meals, interruptedand abandoned at the sudden flash of a new thought, a thought to be pursuedat once, to be tried, to be tested, to be worked on for months, and to bediscarded as another failure—the moments snatched from conferences, fromcontracts, from theduties of running the best steel mills in the country,snatched almostguiltily, as for a secret love—the one thought held immovablyacross a span of ten years, undereverything he did and everything he saw, thethought held in his mindwhen he looked at the buildings of a city, at thetrack of a railroad, atthe light in the windows of a distant farmhouse, atthe knife in the handsof a beautiful woman cutting a piece of fruit at abanquet, the thought ofa metal alloy that would do more than steel had everdone, a metal thatwould be to steel what steel had been to iron—the acts ofself-racking when he discarded a hope or a sample,not permitting himself toknow that he was tired, not giving himself timeto feel, driving himselfthrough the wringing torture of: "not good enough . . . still not good enough. . ." and going on with no motor save the conviction that it could be done——then the day when it was done and its result was called Rearden Metal— —these were the things that had come to white heat, had melted and fusedwithin him, and their alloy was a strange, quiet feeling that made him smileat the countryside in the darkness and wonder why happiness could hurt.

After a while, he realized that he was thinking of his past, as if certaindays of it were spread before him, demanding to be seen again. He did notwant to look at them; he despised memories as a pointless indulgence. Butthen he understood that he thought of them tonight in honor of that piece ofmetal in his pocket. Then he permitted himself to look.

He saw the day when he stood on a rocky ledge and felt a thread of sweatrunning from his temple down his neck. He was fourteen years old and it washis first day of work in the iron mines of Minnesota. He was trying to learnto breathe against the scalding pain in his chest. He stood, cursing himself,because he had made up his mind that he would not be tired. After a while, hewent back to his task; he decided that pain was not a valid reason forstopping, He saw the day when he stood at the window of his office and lookedat the mines; he owned them as of that morning. He was thirty years old. Whathad gone on in the years between did not matter, just as pain had notmattered. He had worked in mines, in foundries, in the steel mills of thenorth, moving toward the purpose he had chosen. All he remembered of thosejobs was that the men around him had never seemed to know what to do, whilehe had always known. He remembered wondering why so many iron mines wereclosing, just as these had been about to close until he took them over. Helooked at the shelves of rock in the distance. Workers were putting up a newsign above a gate at the end of a road: Rearden Ore.

He saw an evening when he sat slumped across his desk in that office.

It was late and his staff had left; so he could lie there alone,unwitnessed. He was tired. It was as if he had run a race against his ownbody, and all the exhaustion of years, which he had refused to acknowledge,had caught him at once and flattened him against the desk top. He feltnothing, except the desire not to move. He did not have the strength to feel-not even to suffer. He had burned everything there was to burn within him; hehad scattered so many sparks to start so many things— and he wondered whethersomeone could give him now the spark he needed, now when he felt unable everto rise again. He asked himself who had started him and kept him going. Thenhe raised his head.

Slowly, with the greatest effort of his life, he made his body rise untilhe was able to sit upright with only one hand pressed to the desk and atrembling arm to support him.

He never asked that question again. He saw the day when he stood on a hilland looked at a grimy wasteland of structures that had been a steel plant. Itwas closed and given up. He had bought it the night before. There was astrong wind and a gray light squeezed from among the clouds. In that light,he saw the brown-red of rust, like dead blood, on the steel of the giantcranes—and bright, green, living weeds, like gorged cannibals, growing overpiles of broken glass at the foot of walls made of empty frames. At a gate inthe distance, he saw the black silhouettes of men. They were the unemployedfrom the rotting hovels of what had once been a prosperous town.

They stood silently, looking at the glittering car he had left at the gateof the mills; they wondered whether the man on the hill was the Hank Reardenthat people were talking about, and whether it was true that the mills wereto be reopened. "The historical cycle of steel-making in Pennsylvania isobviously running down, " a newspaper had said, "and experts agree that HenryRearden's venture into steel is hopeless. You may soon witness thesensational end of the sensational Henry Rearden." That was ten years ago.Tonight, the cold wind on his face felt like the wind of that day. He turnedto look back. The red glow of the mills breathed in the sky, a sight as life-giving as a sunrise. These had been his stops, the stations which an expresshad reached and passed. He remembered nothing distinct of the years betweenthem; the years were blurred, like a streak of speed.

Whatever it was, he thought, whatever the strain and the agony, they wereworth it, because they had made him reach this day—this day when the firstheat of the first order of Rearden Metal had been poured, to become rails forTaggart Transcontinental.

He touched the bracelet in his pocket. He had had it made from that firstpoured metal. It was for his wife. As he touched it, he realized suddenlythat he had thought of an abstraction called "his wife"—not of the woman towhom he was married.

He felt a stab of regret, wishing he had not made the bracelet, then awave of self-reproach for the regret. He shook his head. This was not thetime for his old doubts. He felt that he could forgive anything to anyone,because happiness was the greatest agent of purification. He felt certainthat every living being wished him well tonight. He wanted to meet someone,to face the first stranger, to stand disarmed and open, and to say, "Look atme." People, he thought, were as hungry for a sight of joy as he had alwaysbeen—for a moment's relief from that gray load of suffering which seemed soinexplicable and unnecessary. He had never been able to understand why menshould be unhappy.

The dark road had risen imperceptibly to the top of a hill. He stopped andturned. The red glow was a narrow strip, far to the west. Above it, small ata distance of miles, the words of a neon sign stood written on the blacknessof the sky: REARDEN STEEL. He stood straight, as if before a bench ofjudgment. He thought that in the darkness of this night other signs werelighted over the country: Rearden Ore—Rearden Coal—Rearden Limestone. Hethought of the days behind him. He wished it were possible to light a neonsign above them, saying: Rearden Life.

He turned sharply and walked on. As the road came closer to his house, henoticed that his steps were slowing down and that something was ebbing awayfrom his mood. He felt a dim reluctance to enter his home, which he did notwant to feel. No, he thought, not tonight; they'll understand it, tonight.But he did not know, he had never defined, what it was that he wanted them tounderstand.

He saw lights in the windows of the living room, when he approached hishouse. The house stood on a hill, rising before him like a big white bulk; itlooked naked, with a few semi-colonial pillars for reluctant ornament; it hadthe cheerless look of a nudity not worth revealing.

He was not certain whether his wife noticed him when he entered the livingroom. She sat by the fireplace, talking, the curve of her arm floating ingraceful emphasis of her words. He heard a small break in her voice, andthought that she had seen him, but she did not look up and her sentence wenton smoothly; he could not be certain, "—but it's just that a man of cultureis bored with the alleged wonders of purely material ingenuity," she wassaying. "He simply refuses to get excited about plumbing."

Then she turned her head, looked at Rearden in the shadows across the longroom, and her arms spread gracefully, like two swan necks by her sides.

"Why, darling," she said in a bright tone of amusement, "isn't it tooearly to come home? Wasn't there some slag to sweep or tuyeres to polish?"

They all turned to him—his mother, his brother Philip and Paul Larkin,their old friend.

"I'm sorry," he answered. "I know I'm late."

"Don't say you're sorry," said his mother. "You could have telephoned." Helooked at her, trying vaguely to remember something."You promised to be here for dinner tonight."

"Oh, that's right, I did. I'm sorry. But today at the mills, we poured—"He stopped; he did not know what made him unable to utter the one thing hehad come home to say; he added only, "It's just that I . . . forgot."

"That's what Mother means," said Philip.

"Oh, let him get his bearings, he's not quite here yet, he's still at themills," his wife said gaily. "Do take your coat off, Henry."

Paul Larkin was looking at him with the devoted eyes of an inhibited dog."Hello, Paul," said Rearden. "When did you get in?"

"Oh, I just hopped down on the five thirty-five from New York." Larkin wassmiling in gratitude for the attention.

"Trouble?"

"Who hasn't got trouble these days?" Larkin's smile became resigned, toindicate that the remark was merely philosophical. "But no, no specialtrouble this time. I just thought I'd drop in to see you."

His wife laughed. "You've disappointed him, Paul." She turned to Rearden."Is it an inferiority complex or a superiority one, Henry? Do you believethat nobody can want to see you just for your own sake, or do you believethat nobody can get along without your help?"

He wanted to utter an angry denial, but she was smiling at him as if thiswere merely a conversational joke, and he had no capacity for the sort ofconversations which were not supposed to be meant, so he did not answer. Hestood looking at her, wondering about the things he had never been able tounderstand.

Lillian Rearden was generally regarded as a beautiful woman. She had atall, graceful body, the kind that looked well in high-waisted gowns of theEmpire style, which she made it a practice to wear. Her exquisite profilebelonged to a cameo of the same period: its pure, proud lines and thelustrous, light brown waves of her hair, worn with classical simplicity,suggested an austere, imperial beauty. But when she turned full-face, peopleexperienced a small shock of disappointment.

Her face was not beautiful. The eyes were the flaw: they were vaguelypale, neither quite gray nor brown, lifelessly empty of expression. Reardenhad always wondered, since she seemed amused so often, why there was nogaiety in her face.

"We have met before, dear, " she said, in answer to his silent scrutiny,"though you don't seem to be sure of it."

"Have you had any dinner, Henry?" his mother asked; there was areproachful impatience in her voice, as if his hunger were a personal insultto her.

"Yes ... No ... I wasn't hungry."

"I'd better ring to have them—"

"No, Mother, not now, it doesn't matter."

"That's the trouble I've always had with you." She was not looking at him,but reciting words into space. "It's no use trying to do things for you, youdon't appreciate it. I could never make you eat properly."

"Henry, you work too hard," said Philip. "It's not good for you."

Rearden laughed. "I like it."

"That's what you tell yourself. It's a form of neurosis, you know. When aman drowns himself in work, it's because he's trying to escape fromsomething. You ought to have a hobby."

"Oh, Phil, for Christ's sake!" he said, and regretted the irritation inhis voice.

Philip had always been in precarious health, though doctors had found nospecific defect in his loose, gangling body. He was thirty-eight, but hischronic weariness made people think at times that he was older than hisbrother.

"You ought to learn to have some fun," said Philip. "Otherwise, you'llbecome dull and narrow. Single-tracked, you know. You ought to get out ofyour little private shell and take a look at the world. You don't want tomiss life, the way you're doing."

Fighting anger, Rearden told himself that this was Philip's form ofsolicitude. He told himself that it would be unjust to feel resentment: theywere all trying to show their concern for him—and he wished these were notthe things they had chosen for concern.

"I had a pretty good time today, Phil," he answered, smiling—and wonderedwhy Philip did not ask him what it was.

He wished one of them would ask him. He was finding it hard toconcentrate. The sight of the running metal was still burned into his mind,filling his consciousness, leaving no room for anything else.

"You might have apologized, only I ought to know better than to expectit." It was his mother's voice; he turned: she was looking at him with thatinjured look which proclaims the long-bearing patience of the defenseless.

"Mrs. Beecham was here for dinner," she said reproachfully.

"What?"

"Mrs. Beecham. My friend Mrs. Beecham.""Yes?"

"I told you about her, I told you many times, but you never rememberanything I say. Mrs. Beecham was so anxious to meet you, but she had to leaveafter dinner, she couldn't wait, Mrs. Beecham is a very busy person. Shewanted so much to tell you about the wonderful work we're doing in our parishschool, and about the classes in metal craftsmanship, and about the beautifulwrought-iron doorknobs that the little slum children are making all bythemselves."

It took the whole of his sense of consideration to force himself to answerevenly, "I'm sorry if I disappointed you, Mother."

"You're not sorry. You could've been here if you'd made the effort. Butwhen did you ever make an effort for anybody but yourself? You're notinterested in any of us or in anything we do. You think that if you pay thebills, that's enough, don't you? Money! That's all you know. And all you giveus is money. Have you ever given us any time?"

If this meant that she missed him, he thought, then it meant affection,and if it meant affection, then he was unjust to experience a heavy, murky

feeling which kept him silent lest his voice betray that the feeling wasdisgust.

"You don't care," her voice went half-spitting, half-begging on. "Lillianneeded you today for a very important problem, but I told her it was no usewaiting to discuss it with you."

"Oh, Mother, it's not important!" said Lillian. "Not to Henry."

He turned to her. He stood in the middle of the room, with his trenchcoatstill on, as if he were trapped in an unreality that would not become real tohim.

"It's not important at all," said Lillian gaily; he could not tell whetherher voice was apologetic or boastful. "It's not business. It's purely non-commercial . "

"What is it?"

"Just a party I'm planning to give.""A party?"

"Oh, don't look frightened, it's not for tomorrow night. I know thatyou're so very busy, but it's for three months from now and I want it to be avery big, very special affair, so would you promise me to be here that nightand not in Minnesota or Colorado or California?"

She was looking at him in an odd manner, speaking too lightly and toopurposefully at once, her smile overstressing an air of innocence andsuggesting something like a hidden trump card.

"Three months from now?" he said. "But you know that I can't tell whaturgent business might come up to call me out of town."

"Oh, I know! But couldn't I make a formal appointment with you, way inadvance, just like any railroad executive, automobile manufacturer or junk—Imean, scrap—dealer? They say you never miss an appointment. Of course, I'dlet you pick the date to suit your convenience." She was looking up at him,her glance acquiring some special quality of feminine appeal by being sentfrom under her lowered forehead up toward his full height; she asked, alittle too casually and too cautiously, "The date I had in mind was Decembertenth, but would you prefer the ninth or the eleventh?"

"It makes no difference to me."

She said gently, "December tenth is our wedding anniversary, Henry."

They were all watching his face; if they expected a look of guilt, whatthey saw, instead, was a faint smile of amusement. She could not haveintended this as a trap, he thought, because he could escape it so easily, byrefusing to accept any blame for his forgetfulness and by leaving herspurned; she knew that his feeling for her was her only weapon. Her motive,he thought, was a proudly indirect attempt to test his feeling and to confessher own. A party was not his form of celebration, but it was hers. It meantnothing in his terms; in hers, it meant the best tribute she could offer tohim and to their marriage. He had to respect her intention, he thought, evenif he did not share her standards, even if he did not know whether he stillcared for any tribute from her. He had to let her win, he thought, becauseshe had thrown herself upon his mercy. He smiled, an open, unresentful smilein acknowledgment of her victory. "All right, Lillian," he said quietly, "Ipromise to be here on the night of December tenth."

"Thank you, dear." Her smile had a closed, mysterious quality; he wonderedwhy he had a moment's impression that his attitude had disappointed them all.

If she trusted him, he thought, if her feeling for him was still alive,then he would match her trust. He had to say it; words were a lens to focusone's mind, and he could not use words for anything else tonight. "I'm sorryI'm late, Lillian, but today at the mills we poured the first heat of ReardenMetal."

There was a moment of silence. Then Philip said, "Well, that's nice."The others said nothing.

He put his hand in his pocket. When he touched it, the reality of thebracelet swept out everything else; he felt as he had felt when the liquidmetal had poured through space before him.

"I brought you a present, Lillian."

He did not know that he stood straight and that the gesture of his arm wasthat of a returning crusader offering his trophy to his love, when he droppeda small chain of metal into her lap.

Lillian Rearden picked it up, hooked on the tips of two straight fingers,and raised it to the light. The links were heavy, crudely made, the shiningmetal had an odd tinge, it was greenish-blue.

"What's that?" she asked.

"The first thing made from the first heat of the first order of ReardenMetal."

"You mean," she said, "it's fully as valuable as a piece of railroadrails?"

He looked at her blankly.

She jingled the bracelet, making it sparkle under the light. "Henry, it'sperfectly wonderful! What originality! I shall be the sensation of New York,wearing jewelry made of the same stuff as bridge girders, truck motors,kitchen stoves, typewriters, and—what was it you were saying about it theother day, darling?—soup kettles?"

"God, Henry, but you're conceited!" said Philip.

Lillian laughed. "He's a sentimentalist. All men are. But, darling, I doappreciate it. It isn't the gift, it's the intention, I know."

"The intention's plain selfishness, if you ask me," said Rearden's mother."Another man would bring a diamond bracelet, if he wanted to give his wife apresent, because it's' her pleasure he'd think of, not his own. But Henrythinks that just because he's made a new kind of tin, why, it's got to bemore precious than diamonds to everybody, just because it's he that's madeit. That's the way he's been since he was five years old—the most conceitedbrat you ever saw—and I knew he'd grow up to be the most selfish creature onGod's earth."

"No, it's sweet," said Lillian. "It's charming." She dropped the braceletdown on the table. She got up, put her hands on Rearden's shoulders, andraising herself on tiptoe, kissed him on the cheek, saying, "Thank you,dear."

He did not move, did not bend his head down to her. After a while, heturned, took off his coat and sat down by the fire, apart from the others. Hefelt nothing but an immense exhaustion.

He did not listen to their talk. He heard dimly that Lillian was arguing,defending him against his mother.

"I know him better than you do," his mother was saying. "Hank Rearden'snot interested in man, beast or weed unless it's tied in some way to himselfand his work. That's all he cares about. I've tried my best to teach him somehumility, I've tried all my life, but I've failed."

He had offered his mother unlimited means to live as and where shepleased; he wondered why she had insisted that she wanted to live with him.His success, he had thought, meant something to her, and if it did, then itwas a bond between them, the only kind of bond he recognized; if she wanted aplace in the home of her successful son, he would not deny it to her.

"It's no use hoping to make a saint out of Henry, Mother," said Philip."He wasn't meant to be one."

"Oh but, Philip, you're wrong!" said Lillian. "You're so wrong! Henry hasall the makings of a saint. That's the trouble." What did they seek fromhim?—thought Rearden—what were they after? He had never asked anything ofthem; it was they who wished to hold him, they who pressed a claim on him—andthe claim seemed to have the form of affection, but it was a form which he

found harder to endure than any sort of hatred. He despised causelessaffection, just as he despised unearned wealth. They professed to love himfor some unknown reason and they ignored all the things for which he couldwish to be loved. He wondered what response they could hope to obtain fromhim in such manner—if his response was what they wanted.

And it was, he thought; else why those constant complaints, thoseunceasing accusations about his indifference? Why that chronic air ofsuspicion, as if they were waiting to be hurt? He had never had a desire tohurt them, but he had always felt their defensive, reproachful expectation;they seemed wounded by anything he said, it was not a matter of his words oractions, it was almost . . . almost as if they were Wounded by the mere factof his being. Don't start imagining the insane —he told himself severely,struggling to face the riddle with the strictest of his ruthless sense ofjustice. He could not condemn them without understanding; and he could notunderstand.

Did he like them? No, he thought; he had wanted to like them, which wasnot the same. He had wanted it in the name of some unstated potentialitywhich he had once expected to see in any human being. He felt nothing forthem now, nothing but the merciless zero of indifference, not even the regretof a loss. Did he need any person as part of his life? Did he miss thefeeling he had wanted to feel? No, he thought. Had he ever missed it? Yes, hethought, in his youth; not any longer.

His sense of exhaustion was growing; he realized that it was boredom.

He owed them the courtesy of hiding it, he thought—and sat motionless,fighting a desire for sleep that was turning into physical pain.

His eyes were closing, when he felt two soft, moist fingers touching hishand: Paul Larkin had pulled a chair to his side and was leaning over for aprivate conversation.

"I don't care what the industry says about it, Hank, you've got a greatproduct in Rearden Metal, a great product, it will make a fortune, likeeverything you touch."

"Yes," said Rearden, "it will."

"I just ... I just hope you don't run into trouble.""What trouble?"

"Oh, I don't know . . . the way things are nowadays . . . there's people,who . . . but how can we tell? . . . anything can happen. . . .""What trouble?"

Larkin sat hunched, looking up with his gentle, pleading eyes. His short,plumpish figure always seemed unprotected and incomplete, as if he needed ashell to shrink into at the slightest touch. His wistful eyes, his lost,helpless, appealing smile served as substitute for the shell. The smile wasdisarming, like that of a boy who throws himself at the mercy of anincomprehensible universe. He was fifty-three years old.

"Your public relations aren't any too good, Hank," he said. "You've alwayshad a bad press."

"So what?"

"You're not popular, Hank."

"I haven't heard any complaints from my customers."

"That's not what I mean. You ought to hire yourself a good press agent tosell you to the public,"

"What for? It's steel that I'm selling."

"But you don't want to have the public against you. Public opinion, youknow—it can mean a lot."

"I don't think the public's against me. And I don't think that it means adamn, one way or another,"

"The newspapers are against you."

"They have time to waste. I haven't."

"I don't like it, Hank. It's not good.""What?"

"What they write about you.""What do they write about me?"

"Well, you know the stuff. That you're intractable. That you're ruthless.That you won't allow anyone any voice in the running of your mills.That your only goal is to make steel and to make money.""But that is my only goal.""But you shouldn't say it.""Why not? What is it I'm supposed to say?""Oh, I don't know . . . But your mills—""They're my mills, aren't they?"

"Yes, but—but you shouldn't remind people of that too loudly. . . .You know how it is nowadays. . . . They think that your attitude is anti-social . "

"I don't give a damn what they think,"Paul Larkin sighed.

"What's the matter, Paul? What are you driving at?"

"Nothing . . . nothing in particular. Only one never knows what can happenin times like these. . . . One has to be so careful . . ."

Rearden chuckled. "You're not trying to worry about me, are you?"

"It's just that I'm your friend, Hank. I'm your friend. You know how muchI admire you."

Paul Larkin had always been unlucky. Nothing he touched ever came offquite well, nothing ever quite failed or succeeded. He was a businessman, buthe could not manage to remain for long in any one line of business. At themoment, he was struggling with a modest plant that manufactured miningequipment.

He had clung to Rearden for years, in awed admiration. He came for advice,he asked for loans at times, but not often; the loans were modest and werealways repaid, though not always on time. His motive in the relationshipseemed to resemble the need of an anemic person who receives a kind of livingtransfusion from the mere sight of a savagely overabundant vitality.

Watching Larkin's efforts, Rearden felt what he did when he watched an antstruggling under the load of a matchstick. It's so hard for him, thoughtRearden, and so easy for me. So he gave advice, attention and a tactful,patient interest, whenever he could.

"I'm your friend, Hank."

Rearden looked at him inquiringly.

Larkin glanced away, as if debating something in his mind. After a while,he asked cautiously, "How is your man in Washington?""Okay, I guess."

"You ought to be sure of it. It's important." He looked up at Rearden, andrepeated with a kind of stressed insistence, as if discharging a painfulmoral duty, "Hank, it's very important."

"I suppose so."

"In fact, that's what I came here to tell you.""For any special reason?"

Larkin considered it and decided that the duty was discharged. "No,"he said.

Rearden disliked the subject. He knew that it was necessary to have a manto protect him from the legislature; all industrialists had to employ suchmen. But he had never given much attention to this aspect of his business; hecould not quite convince himself that it was necessary.

An inexplicable kind of distaste, part fastidiousness, part boredom,stopped him whenever he tried to consider it.

"Trouble is, Paul, " he said, thinking aloud, "that the men one has to pickfor that job are such a crummy lot,"

Larkin looked away. "That's life," he said.

"Damned if I see why. Can you tell me that? What's wrong with the world?"

Larkin shrugged sadly. "Why ask useless questions? How deep is the ocean?How high is the sky? Who is John Gait?"

Rearden sat up straight. "No," he said sharply. "No. There's no reason tofeel that way."

He got up. His exhaustion had gone while he talked about his business. Hefelt a sudden spurt of rebellion, a need to recapture and defiantly toreassert his own view of existence, that sense of it which he had held whilewalking home tonight and which now seemed threatened in some nameless manner.

He paced the room, his energy returning. He looked at his family.

They were bewildered, unhappy children—he thought—all of them, even hismother, and he was foolish to resent their ineptitude; it came from theirhelplessness, not from malice. It was he who had to make himself learn tounderstand them, since he had so much to give, since they could never sharehis sense of joyous, boundless power.

He glanced at them from across the room. His mother and Philip wereengaged in some eager discussion; but he noted that they were not reallyeager, they were nervous. Philip sat in a low chair, his stomach forward, hisweight on his shoulder blades, as if the miserable discomfort of his positionwere intended to punish the onlookers.

"What's the matter, Phil?" Rearden asked, approaching him. "You look donein. "

"I've had a hard day," said Philip sullenly.

"You're not the only one who works hard," said his mother. "Others haveproblems, too—even if they're not billion-dollar, trans-super-continentalproblems like yours."

"Why, that's good. I always thought that Phil should find some interest ofhis own."

"Good? You mean you like to see your brother sweating his health away? Itamuses you, doesn't it? I always thought it did.""Why, no, Mother. I'd like to help."

"You don't have to help. You don't have to feel anything for any of us."

Rearden had never known what his brother was doing or wished to do. He hadsent Philip through college, but Philip had not been able to decide on anyspecific ambition. There was something wrong, by Rearden's standards, with aman who did not seek any gainful employment, but he would not impose hisstandards on Philip; he could afford to support his brother and never noticethe expense. Let him take it easy, Rearden had thought for years, let himhave a chance to choose his career without the strain of struggling for alivelihood.

"What were you doing today, Phil?" he asked patiently."It wouldn't interest you."

"It does interest me. That's why I'm asking."

"I had to see twenty different people all over the place, from here toRedding to Wilmington."

"What did you have to see them about?"

"I am trying to raise money for Friends of Global Progress."

Rearden had never been able to keep track of the many organizations towhich Philip belonged, nor to get a clear idea of their activities. He hadheard Philip talking vaguely about this one for the last six months.

It seemed to be devoted to some sort of free lectures on psychology, folkmusic and co-operative farming. Rearden felt contempt for groups of that kindand saw no reason for a closer inquiry into their nature.

He remained silent. Philip added without being prompted, "We need tenthousand dollars for a vital program, but it's a martyr's task, trying toraise money. There's not a speck of social conscience left in people.

When I think of the kind of bloated money-bags I saw today—why, they spendmore than that on any whim, but I couldn't squeeze just a hundred bucks apiece out of them, which was all I asked. They have no sense of moral duty,no . . . What are you laughing at?" he asked sharply. Rearden stood beforehim, grinning.

It was so childishly blatant, thought Rearden, so helplessly crude: thehint and the insult, offered together. It would be so easy to squash Philipby returning the insult, he thought—by returning an insult which would bedeadly because it would be true—that he could not bring himself to utter it.Surely, he thought, the poor fool knows he's at my mercy, knows he's openedhimself to be hurt, so I don't have to do it, and my not doing it is my bestanswer, which he won't be able to miss.

What sort of misery does he really live in, to get himself twisted quiteso badly?

And then Rearden thought suddenly that he could break through Philip'schronic wretchedness for once, give him a shock of pleasure, the unexpectedgratification of a hopeless desire. He thought: What do I care about thenature of his desire?—it's his, just as Rearden Metal was mine—it must meanto him what that meant to me—let's see him happy just once, it might teachhim something—didn't I say that happiness is the agent of purification?—I'mcelebrating tonight, so let him share in it—it will be so much for him, andso little for me.

"Philip," he said, smiling, "call Miss Ives at my office tomorrow.

She'll have a check for you for ten thousand dollars."

Philip stared at him blankly; it was neither shock nor pleasure; it wasjust the empty stare of eyes that looked glassy.

"Oh," said Philip, then added, "We'll appreciate it very much."

There was no emotion in his voice, not even the simple one of greed.

Rearden could not understand his own feeling: it was as if somethingleaden and empty were collapsing within him, he felt both the weight and theemptiness, together. He knew it was disappointment, but he wondered why itwas so gray and ugly.

"It's very nice of you, Henry," Philip said dryly. "I'm surprised. Ididn't expect it of you."

"Don't you understand it, Phil?" said Lillian, her voice peculiarly clearand lilting. "Henry's poured his metal today." She turned to Rearden. "Shallwe declare it a national holiday, darling?"

"You're a good man, Henry," said his mother, and added, "but not oftenenough."

Rearden stood looking at Philip, as if waiting.

Philip looked away, then raised his eyes and held Rearden's glance, as ifengaged in a scrutiny of his own.

"You don't really care about helping the underprivileged, do you?"

Philip asked—and Rearden heard, unable to believe it, that the tone of hisvoice was reproachful.

"No, Phil, I don't care about it at all. I only wanted you to be happy."

"But that money is not for me. I am not collecting it for any personalmotive. I have no selfish interest in the matter whatever." His voice wascold, with a note of self-conscious virtue.

Rearden turned away. He felt a sudden loathing: not because the words werehypocrisy, but because they were true; Philip meant them.

"By the way, Henry," Philip added, "do you mind if I ask you to have MissIves give me the money in cash?" Rearden turned back to him, puzzled. "Yousee, Friends of Global Progress are a very progressive group and they have

always maintained that you represent the blackest element of socialretrogression ha the country, so it would embarrass us, you know, to haveyour name on our list of contributors, because somebody might accuse us ofbeing in the pay of Hank Rearden."

He wanted to slap Philip's face. But an almost unendurable contempt madehim close his eyes, instead.

"All right," he said quietly, "you can have it in cash."

He walked away, to the farthest window of the room, and stood looking atthe glow of the mills in the distance.

He heard Larkin's voice crying after him, "Damn it, Hank, you shouldn'thave given it to him!"

Then Lillian's voice came, cold and gay: "But you're wrong, Paul, you'reso wrong! What would happen to Henry's vanity if he didn't have us to throwalms to? What would become of his strength if he didn't have weaker people todominate? What would he do with himself if he didn't keep us around asdependents? It's quite all right, really, I'm not criticizing him, it's justa law of human nature."

She took the metal bracelet and held it up, letting it glitter in thelamplight.

"A chain," she said. "Appropriate, isn't it? It's the chain by which heholds us all in bondage."

CHAPTER IIITHE TOP AND THE BOTTOM

The ceiling was that of a cellar, so heavy and low that people stoopedwhen crossing the room, as if the weight of the vaulting rested on theirshoulders. The circular booths of dark red leather were built into walls ofstone that looked eaten by age and dampness. There were no windows, onlypatches of blue light shooting from dents in the masonry, the dead blue lightproper for use in blackouts. The place was entered by way of narrow stepsthat led down, as if descending deep under the ground. This was the mostexpensive barroom in New York and it was built on the roof of a skyscraper.

Four men sat at a table. Raised sixty floors above the city, they did notspeak loudly as one speaks from a height in the freedom of air and space;they kept their voices low, as befitted a cellar.

"Conditions and circumstances, Jim," said Orren Boyle. "Conditions andcircumstances absolutely beyond human control. We had everything mapped toroll those rails, but unforeseen developments set in which nobody could haveprevented. If you'd only given us a chance, Jim."

"Disunity," drawled James Taggart, "seems to be the basic cause of allsocial problems. My sister has a certain influence with a certain elementamong our stockholders. Their disruptive tactics cannot always be defeated."

"You said it, Jim. Disunity, that's the trouble. It's my absolute opinionthat in our complex industrial society, no business enterprise can succeedwithout sharing the burden of the problems of other enterprises."

Taggart took a sip of his drink and put it down again. "I wish they'd firethat bartender," he said.

"For instance, consider Associated Steel. We've got the most modern plantin the country and the best organization. That seems to me to be anindisputable fact, because we got the Industrial Efficiency Award of GlobeMagazine last year. So we can maintain that we've done our best and nobodycan blame us. But we cannot help it if the iron ore situation is a nationalproblem. We could not get the ore, Jim."

Taggart said nothing. He sat with his elbows spread wide on the table top.The table was uncomfortably small, and this made it more uncomfortable forhis three companions, but they did not seem to question his privilege.

"Nobody can get ore any longer," said Boyle. "Natural exhaustion of themines, you know, and the wearing out of equipment, and shortages ofmaterials, and difficulties of transportation, and other unavoidableconditions."

"The ore industry is crumbling. That's what's killing the mining equipmentbusiness," said Paul Larkin.

"It's been proved that every business depends upon every other business,"said Orren Boyle. "So everybody ought to share the burdens of everybodyelse. "

"That is, I think, true," said Wesley Mouch. But nobody ever paid anyattention to Wesley Mouch.

"My purpose," said Orren Boyle, "is the preservation of a free economy.It's generally conceded that free economy is now on trial. Unless it provesits social value and assumes its social responsibilities, the people won'tstand for it. If it doesn't develop a public spirit, it's done for, make nomistake about that."

Orren Boyle had appeared from nowhere, five years ago, and had since madethe cover of every national news magazine. He had started out with a hundredthousand dollars of his own and a two-hundred million-dollar loan from thegovernment. Now he headed an enormous concern which had swallowed many

smaller companies. This proved, he liked to say, that individual abilitystill had a chance to succeed in the world.

"The only justification of private property," said Orren Boyle, "is publicservice."

"That is, I think, indubitable," said Wesley Mouch.

Orren Boyle made a noise, swallowing his liquor. He was a large man withbig, virile gestures; everything about his person was loudly full of life,except the small black slits of his eyes.

"Jim," he said, "Rearden Metal seems to be a colossal kind of swindle."

"Uh-huh," said Taggart.

"I hear there's not a single expert who's given a favorable report on it.""No, not one."

"We've been improving steel rails for generations, and increasing theirweight. Now, is it true that these Rearden Metal rails are to be lighter thanthe cheapest grade of steel?"

"That's right," said Taggart. "Lighter."

"But it's ridiculous, Jim. It's physically impossible. For your heavy-duty, high-speed, main-line track?""That's right."

"But you're just inviting disaster.""My sister is."

Taggart made the stem of his glass whirl slowly between two fingers.There was a moment of silence.

"The National Council of Metal Industries," said Orren Boyle, "passed aresolution to appoint a committee to study the question of Rearden Metal,inasmuch as its use may be an actual public hazard."

"That is, in my opinion, wise," said Wesley Mouch.

"When everybody agrees," Taggart's voice suddenly went shrill, "whenpeople are unanimous, how does one man dare to dissent? By what right? That'swhat I want to know—by what right?"

Boyle's eyes darted to Taggart's face, but the dim light of the room madeit impossible to see faces clearly: he saw only a pale, bluish smear.

"When we think of the natural resources, at a time of critical shortage,"Boyle said softly, "when we think of the crucial raw materials that are beingwasted on an irresponsible private experiment, when we think of the ore . .

He did not finish. He glanced at Taggart again. But Taggart seemed to knowthat Boyle was waiting and to find the silence enjoyable.

"The public has a vital stake in natural resources, Jim, such as iron ore.The public can't remain indifferent to reckless, selfish waste by an anti-social individual. After all, private property is a trusteeship held for thebenefit of society as a whole."

Taggart glanced at Boyle and smiled; the smile was pointed, it seemed tosay that something in his words was an answer to something in the words ofBoyle. "The liquor they serve here is swill. I suppose that's the price wehave to pay for not being crowded by all kinds of rabble. But I do wishthey'd recognize that they're dealing with experts.

Since I hold the purse strings, I expect to get my money's worth and at mypleasure."

Boyle did not answer; his face had become sullen. "Listen, Jim . . ."he began heavily.

Taggart smiled. "What? I'm listening."

"Jim, you will agree, I'm sure, that there's nothing more destructive thana monopoly."

"Yes," said Taggart, "on the one hand. On the other, there's the blight ofunbridled competition."

"That's true. That's very true. The proper course is always, in myopinion, in the middle. So it is, I think, the duty of society to snip theextremes, now isn't it?"

"Yes," said Taggart, "it is."

"Consider the picture in the iron-ore business. The national output seemsto be falling at an ungodly rate. It threatens the existence of the wholesteel industry. Steel mills are shutting down all over the country.

There's only one mining company that's lucky enough not to be affected bythe general conditions. Its output seems to be plentiful and always availableon schedule. But who gets the benefit of it? Nobody except its owner. Wouldyou say that that's fair?"

"No," said Taggart, "it isn't fair."

"Most of us don't own iron mines. How can we compete with a man who's gota corner on God's natural resources? Is it any wonder that he can alwaysdeliver steel, while we have to struggle and wait and lose our customers andgo out of business? Is it in the public interest to let one man destroy anentire industry?"

"No," said Taggart, "it isn't."

"It seems to me that the national policy ought to be aimed at theobjective of giving everybody a chance at his fair share of iron ore, with aview toward the preservation of the industry as a whole. Don't you think so?"

"I think so."

Boyle sighed. Then he said cautiously, "But I guess there aren't manypeople in Washington capable of understanding a progressive social policy."

Taggart said slowly, "There are. No, not many and not easy to approach,but there are. I might speak to them."

Boyle picked up his drink and swallowed it in one gulp, as if he had heardall he had wanted to hear.

"Speaking of progressive policies, Orren," said Taggart, "you might askyourself whether at a time of transportation shortages, when so manyrailroads are going bankrupt and large areas are left without rail service,whether it is in the public interest to tolerate wasteful duplication ofservices and the destructive, dog-eat-dog competition of newcomers interritories where established companies have historical priority."

"Well, now," said Boyle pleasantly, "that seems to be an interestingquestion to consider. I might discuss it with a few friends in the NationalAlliance of Railroads."

"Friendships," said Taggart in the tone of an idle abstraction, "are morevaluable than gold." Unexpectedly, he turned to Larkin. "Don't you think so,Paul?"

"Why . . . yes," said Larkin, astonished. "Yes, of course."

"I am counting on yours."

"Huh?"

"I am counting on your many friendships."

They all seemed to know why Larkin did not answer at once; his shouldersseemed to shrink down, closer to the table. "If everybody could pull for acommon purpose, then nobody would have to be hurt!"

he cried suddenly, in a tone of incongruous despair; he saw Taggartwatching him and added, pleading, "I wish we didn't have to hurt anybody."

"That is an anti-social attitude," drawled Taggart. "People who areafraid, to sacrifice somebody have no business talking about a commonpurpose."

"But I'm a student of history," said Larkin hastily. "I recognizehistorical necessity.""Good," said Taggart.

"I can't be expected to buck the trend of the whole world, can I?"Larkin seemed to plead, but the plea was not addressed to anyone.

"Can I?"

"You can't, Mr. Larkin," said Wesley Mouch. "You and I are not to beblamed, if we—"

Larkin jerked his head away; it was almost a shudder; he could not bear tolook at Mouch.

"Did you have a good time in Mexico, Orren?" asked Taggart, his voicesuddenly loud and casual. All of them seemed to know that the purpose oftheir meeting was accomplished and whatever they had come here to understandwas understood.

"Wonderful place, Mexico," Boyle answered cheerfully. "Very stimulatingand thought-provoking. Their food rations are something awful, though. I gotsick. But they're working mighty hard to put their country on its feet."

"How are things going down there?"

"Pretty splendid, it seems to me, pretty splendid. Right at the moment,however, they're . . . But then, what they're aiming at is the future. ThePeople's State of Mexico has a great future. They'll beat us all in a fewyears."

"Did you go down to the San Sebastian Mines?"

The four figures at the table sat up straighter and tighter; all of themhad invested heavily in the stock of the San Sebastian Mines.

Boyle did not answer at once, so that his voice seemed unexpected andunnaturally loud when it burst forth: "Oh, sure, certainly, that's what Iwanted to see most."

"And?"

"And what?"

"How are things going?"

"Great. Great. They must certainly have the biggest deposits of copper onearth, down inside that mountain!""Did they seem to be busy?""Never saw such a busy place in my life.""What were they busy doing?"

"Well, you know, with the kind of Spic superintendent they have downthere, I couldn't understand half of what he was talking about, but they'recertainly busy."

"Any . . . trouble of any kind?"

"Trouble? Not at San Sebastian. It's private property, the last piece ofit left in Mexico, and that does seem to make a difference."

"Orren," Taggart asked cautiously, "what about those rumors that they'replanning to nationalize the San Sebastian Mines?"

"Slander," said Boyle angrily, "plain, vicious slander. I know it forcertain. I had dinner with the Minister of Culture and lunches with all therest of the boys."

"There ought to be a law against irresponsible gossip," said Taggartsullenly. "Let's have another drink."

He waved irritably at a waiter. There was a small bar in a dark corner ofthe room, where an old, wizened bartender stood for long stretches of timewithout moving. When called upon, he moved with contemptuous slowness. Hisjob was that of servant to men's relaxation and pleasure, but his manner wasthat of an embittered quack ministering to some guilty disease.

The four men sat in silence until the waiter returned with their drinks.The glasses he placed on the table were four spots of faint blue glitter inthe semi-darkness, like four feeble jets of gas flame. Taggart reached forhis glass and smiled suddenly.

"Let's drink to the sacrifices to historical necessity," he said, lookingat Larkin.

There was a moment's pause; in a lighted room, it would have been thecontest of two men holding each other's eyes; here, they were merely looking

at each other's eye sockets. Then Larkin picked up his glass, "It's my party,boys," said Taggart, as they drank.

Nobody found anything else to say. until Boyle spoke up with indifferentcuriosity. "Say, Jim, I meant to ask you, what in hell's the matter with yourtrain service down on the San Sebastian Line?"

"Why, what do you mean? What is the matter with it?"

"Well, I don't know, but running just one passenger train a day is—""One train?"

"—is pretty measly service, it seems to me, and what a train! You musthave inherited those coaches from your great-grandfather, and he must haveused them pretty hard. And where on earth did you get that wood-burninglocomotive?"

"Wood-burning?'

"That's what I said, wood-burning. I never saw one before, except inphotographs. What museum did you drag it out of? Now don't act as if youdidn't know it, just tell me what's the gag?"

"Yes, of course I knew it," said Taggart hastily. "It was just . . .

You just happened to choose the one week when we had a little trouble withour motive power—our new engines are on order, but there's been a slightdelay—you know what a problem we're having with the manufacturers oflocomotives—but it's only temporary."

"Of course," said Boyle. "Delays can't be helped. It's the strangest trainI ever rode on, though. Nearly shook my guts out."

Within a few minutes, they noticed that Taggart had become silent.

He seemed preoccupied with a problem of his own. When he rose abruptly,without apology, they rose, too, accepting it as a command.

Larkin muttered, smiling too strenuously, "It was a pleasure, Jim.

A pleasure. That's how great projects are born—over a drink with friends."

"Social reforms are slow," said Taggart coldly. "It is advisable to bepatient and cautious." For the first time, he turned to Wesley Mouch.

"What I like about you, Mouch, is that you don't talk too much."

Wesley Mouch was Rearden's Washington man.

There was still a remnant of sunset light in the sky, when Taggart andBoyle emerged together into the street below. The transition was faintlyshocking to them—the enclosed barroom led one to expect midnight darkness. Atall building stood outlined against the sky, sharp and straight like araised sword. In the distance beyond it, there hung the calendar.

Taggart fumbled irritably with his coat collar, buttoning it against thechill of the streets. He had not intended to go back to the office tonight,but he had to go back. He had to see his sister.

". . .a difficult undertaking ahead of us, Jim," Boyle was saying, "adifficult undertaking, with so many dangers and complications and so much atstake ..."

"It all depends," James Taggart answered slowly, "on knowing the peoplewho make it possible. . . . That's what has to be known—who makes itpossible."

Dagny Taggart was nine years old when she decided that she would run theTaggart Transcontinental Railroad some day. She stated it to herself when shestood alone between the rails, looking at the two straight lines of steelthat went off into the distance and met in a single point. What she felt wasan arrogant pleasure at the way the track cut through the woods: it did notbelong in the midst of ancient trees, among green branches that hung down tomeet green brush and the lonely spears of wild flowers—but there it was. Thetwo steel lines were brilliant in the sun, and the black ties were like therungs of a ladder which she had to climb.

It was not a sudden decision, but only the final seal of words uponsomething she had known long ago. In unspoken understanding, as if bound by a

vow it had never been necessary to take, she and Eddie Willers had giventhemselves to the railroad from the first conscious days of their childhood.

She felt a bored indifference toward the immediate world around her,toward other children and adults alike. She took it as a regrettableaccident, to be borne patiently for a while, that she happened to beimprisoned among people who were dull. She had caught a glimpse of anotherworld and she knew that it existed somewhere, the world that had createdtrains, bridges, telegraph wires and signal lights winking in the night. Shehad to wait, she thought, and grow up to that world.

She never tried to explain why she liked the railroad. Whatever it wasthat others felt, she knew that this was one emotion for which they had noequivalent and no response. She felt the same emotion in school, in classesof mathematics, the only lessons she liked. She felt the excitement ofsolving problems, the insolent delight of taking up a challenge and disposingof it without effort, the eagerness to meet another, harder test. She felt,at the same time, a growing respect for the adversary, for a science that wasso clean, so strict, so luminously rational. Studying mathematics, she felt,quite simply and at once: "How great that men have done this" and "Howwonderful that I'm so good at it." It was the joy of admiration and of one'sown ability, growing together. Her feeling for the railroad was the same:worship of the skill that had gone to make it, of the ingenuity of someone'sclean, reasoning mind, worship with a secret smile that said she would knowhow to make it better some day. She hung around the tracks and theroundhouses like a humble student, but the humility had a touch of futurepride, a pride to be earned.

"You're unbearably conceited," was one of the two sentences she heardthroughout her childhood, even though she never spoke of her own ability. Theother sentence was: "You're selfish." She asked what was meant, but neverreceived an answer. She looked at the adults, wondering how they couldimagine that she would feel guilt from an undefined accusation.

She was twelve years old when she told Eddie Willers that she would runthe railroad when they grew up. She was fifteen when it occurred to her forthe first time that women did not run railroads and that people might object.To hell with that, she thought—and never worried about it again.

She went to work for Taggart Transcontinental at the age of sixteen.

Her father permitted it: he was amused and a little curious. She startedas night operator at a small country station. She had to work nights for thefirst few years, while attending a college of engineering.

James Taggart began his career on the railroad at the same time; he wastwenty-one. He started in the Department of Public Relations.

Dagny's rise among the men who operated Taggart Transcontinental was swiftand uncontested. She took positions of responsibility because there was noone else to take them. There were a few rare men of talent around her, butthey were becoming rarer every year. Her superiors, who held the authority,seemed afraid to exercise it, they spent their time avoiding decisions, soshe told people what to do and they did it.

At every step of her rise, she did the work long before she was grantedthe title. It was like advancing through empty rooms. Nobody opposed her, yetnobody approved of her progress.

Her father seemed astonished and proud of her, but he said nothing andthere was sadness in his eyes when he looked at her in the office She wastwenty-nine years old when he died. "There has always been a Taggart to runthe railroad," was the last thing he said to her. He looked at her with anodd glance: it had the quality of a salute and of compassion, together.

The controlling stock of Taggart Transcontinental was left to JamesTaggart. He was thirty-four when he became President of the railroad Dagnyhad expected the Board of Directors to elect him, but she had never been able

to understand why they did it so eagerly. They talked about tradition, thepresident had always been the eldest son of the Taggart family; they electedJames Taggart in the same manner as they refused to walk under a ladder, topropitiate the same kind of fear. They talked about his gift of "makingrailroads popular," his "good press," his "Washington ability." He seemedunusually skillful at obtaining favors from the Legislature.

Dagny knew nothing about the field of "Washington ability" or what such anability implied. But it seemed to be necessary, so she dismissed it with thethought that there were many kinds of work which were offensive, yetnecessary, such as cleaning sewers; somebody had to do it, and Jim seemed tolike it.

She had never aspired to the presidency; the Operating Department was heronly concern. When she went out on the line, old railroad men, who hated Jim,said, "There will always be a Taggart to run the railroad," looking at her asher father had looked. She was armed against Jim by the conviction that hewas not smart enough to harm the railroad too much and that she would alwaysbe able to correct whatever damage he caused.

At sixteen, sitting at her operator's desk, watching the lighted windowsof Taggart trains roll past, she had thought that she had entered her kind ofworld. In the years since, she learned that she hadn't. The adversary shefound herself forced to fight was not worth matching or beating; it was not asuperior ability which she would have found honor in challenging; it wasineptitude—a gray spread of cotton that deemed soft and shapeless, that couldoffer no resistance to anything or anybody, yet managed to be a barrier inher way. She stood, disarmed, before the riddle of what made this possible.She could find no answer.

It was only in the first few years that she felt herself screamingsilently, at times, for a glimpse of human ability, a single glimpse ofclean, hard, radiant competence. She had fits of tortured longing for afriend or an enemy with a mind better than her own. But the longing passed.She had a job to do. She did not have time to feel pain; not often.

The first step of the policy that James Taggart brought to the railroadwas the construction of the San Sebastian Line. Many men were responsible forit; but to Dagny, one name stood written across that venture, a name thatwiped out all others wherever she saw it. It stood across five years ofstruggle, across miles of wasted track, across sheets of figures thatrecorded the losses of Taggart Transcontinental like a red trickle from awound which would not heal—as it stood on the ticker tape of every stockexchange left in the world—as it stood on smokestacks in the red glare offurnaces melting copper—as it stood in scandalous headlines—as it stood onparchment pages recording the nobility of the centuries—as it stood on cardsattached to flowers in the boudoirs of women scattered through threecontinents.

The name was Francisco d'Anconia.

At the age of twenty-three, when he inherited his fortune, Franciscod'Anconia had been famous as the copper king of the world. Now, at thirty-six, he was famous as the richest man and the most spectacularly worthlessplayboy on earth. He was the last descendant of one of the noblest familiesof Argentina. He owned cattle ranches, coffee plantations and most of thecopper mines of Chile. He owned half of South America and sundry minesscattered through the United States as small change.

When Francisco d'Anconia suddenly bought miles of bare mountains inMexico, news leaked out that he had discovered vast deposits of copper. Hemade no effort to sell stock in his venture; the stock was begged out of hishands, and he merely chose those whom he wished to favor from among theapplicants. His financial talent was called phenomenal; no one had everbeaten him in any transaction—he added to his incredible fortune with every

deal he touched and every step he made, when he took the trouble to make it.Those who censured him most were first to seize the chance of riding on histalent, toward a share of his new wealth. James Taggart, Orren Boyle andtheir friends were among the heaviest stockholders of the project whichFrancisco d'Anconia had named the San Sebastian Mines.

Dagny was never able to discover what influences prompted James Taggart tobuild a railroad branch from Texas into the wilderness of San Sebastian. Itseemed likely that he did not know it himself: like a field without awindbreak, he seemed open to any current, and the final sum was made bychance, A few among the Directors of Taggart Transcontinental objected to theproject. The company needed all its resources to rebuild the Rio Norte Line;it could not do both. But James Taggart was the road's new president. It wasthe first year of his administration. He won.

The People's State of Mexico was eager to co-operate, and signed acontract guaranteeing for two hundred years the property right of TaggartTranscontinental to its railroad line in a country where no property rightsexisted. Francisco d'Anconia had obtained the same guaranty for his mines.

Dagny fought against the building of the San Sebastian Line. She fought bymeans of whoever would listen to her; but she was only an assistant in theOperating Department, too young, without authority, and nobody listened.

She was unable, then or since, to understand the motives of those whodecided to build the line. Sitting as a helpless spectator, a minoritymember, at one of the Board meetings, she felt a strange evasiveness in theair of the room, in every speech, in every argument, as if the real reason oftheir decision were never stated, but clear to everyone except herself.

They spoke about the future importance of the trade with Mexico, about arich stream of freight, about the large revenues assured to the exclusivecarrier of an inexhaustible supply of copper. They proved it by citingFrancisco d'Anconia's past achievements. They did not mention anymineralogical facts about the San Sebastian Mines. Few facts were available;the information which d'Anconia had released was not very specific; but theydid not seem to need facts.

They spoke at great length about the poverty of the Mexicans and theirdesperate need of railroads, "They've never had a chance." "It is our duty tohelp an underprivileged nation to develop. A country, it seems to me, is itsneighbors' keeper."

She sat, listening, and she thought of the many branch lines which TaggartTranscontinental had had to abandon; the revenues of the great railroad hadbeen falling slowly for many years. She thought of the ominous need ofrepairs, ominously neglected over the entire system.

Their policy on the problem of maintenance was not a policy but a gamethey seemed to be playing with a piece of rubber that could be stretched alittle, then a little more.

"The Mexicans, it seems to me, are a very diligent people, crushed bytheir primitive economy. How can they become industrialized if nobody lendsthem a hand?" "When considering an investment, we should, in my opinion, takea chance on human beings, rather than on purely material factors."

She thought of an engine that lay in a ditch beside the Rio Norte Line,because a splice bar had cracked. She thought of the five days when alltraffic was stopped on the Rio Norte Line, because a retaining wall hadcollapsed, pouring tons of rock across the track.

"Since a man must think of the good of his brothers before he thinks ofhis own, it seems to me that a nation must think of its neighbors before itthinks of itself."

She thought of a newcomer called Ellis Wyatt whom people were beginning towatch, because his activity was the first trickle of a torrent of goods aboutto burst from the dying stretches of Colorado. The Rio Norte Line was being

allowed to run its way to a final collapse, just when its fullest efficiencywas about to be needed and used.

"Material greed isn't everything. There are non-material ideals toconsider." "I confess to a feeling of shame when I think that we own a hugenetwork of railways, while the Mexican people have nothing but one or twoinadequate lines." "The old theory of economic self-sufficiency has beenexploded long ago. It is impossible for one country to prosper in the midstof a starving world."

She thought that to make Taggart Transcontinental what it had been once,long before her time, every available rail, spike and dollar was needed—andhow desperately little of it was available.

They spoke also, at the same session, in the same speeches, about theefficiency of the Mexican government that held complete control ofeverything. Mexico had a great future, they said, and would become adangerous competitor in a few years. "Mexico's got discipline," the men ofthe Board kept saying, with a note of envy in their voices.

James Taggart let it be understood—in unfinished sentences and undefinedhints—that his friends in Washington, whom he never named, wished to see arailroad line built in Mexico, that such a line would be of great help inmatters of international diplomacy, that the good will of the public opinionof the world would more than repay Taggart Transcontinental for itsinvestment.

They voted to build the San Sebastian Line at a cost of thirty milliondollars.

When Dagny left the Board room and walked through the clean, cold air ofthe streets, she heard two words repeated clearly, insistently in the numbedemptiness of her mind: Get out . . . Get out . . .

Get out.

She listened, aghast. The thought of leaving Taggart Transcontinental didnot belong among the things she could hold as conceivable. She felt terror,not at the thought, but at the question of what had made her think it. Sheshook her head angrily; she told herself that Taggart Transcontinental wouldnow need her more than ever.

Two of the Directors resigned; so did the Vice-President in Charge ofOperation. He was replaced by a friend of James Taggart, Steel rail was laidacross the Mexican desert—while orders were issued to reduce the speed oftrains on the Rio Norte Line, because the track was shot. A depot ofreinforced concrete, with marble columns and mirrors, was built amidst thedust of an unpaved square in a Mexican village—while a train of tank carscarrying oil went hurtling down an embankment and into a blazing junk pile,because a rail had split on the Rio Norte Line. Ellis Wyatt did not wait forthe court to decide whether the accident was an act of God, as James Taggartclaimed, He transferred the shipping of his oil to the Phoenix-Durango, anobscure railroad which was small and struggling, but struggling well.

This was the rocket that sent the Phoenix-Durango on its way. From thenon, it grew, as Wyatt Oil grew, as factories grew in nearby valleys —as aband of rails and ties grew, at the rate of two miles a month, across thescraggly fields of Mexican corn.

Dagny was thirty-two years old, when she told James Taggart that she wouldresign. She had run the Operating Department for the past three years,without title, credit or authority. She was defeated by loathing for thehours, the days, the nights she had to waste circumventing the interferenceof Jim's friend who bore the title of Vice-President in Charge of Operation.The man had no policy, and any decision he made was always hers, but he madeit only after he had made every effort to make it impossible. What shedelivered to her brother was an ultimatum. He gasped, "But, Dagny, you're a

woman! A woman as Operating Vice-President? It's unheard of! The Board won'tconsider it!" "Then I'm through," she answered.

She did not think of what she would do with the rest of her life. To faceleaving Taggart Transcontinental was like waiting to have her legs amputated;she thought she would let it happen, then take up the load of whatever wasleft.

She never understood why the Board of Directors voted unanimously to makeher Vice-President in Charge of Operation.

It was she who finally gave them their San Sebastian Line. When she tookover, the construction had been under way for three years; one third of itstrack was laid; the cost to date was beyond the authorized total. She firedJim's friends and found a contractor who completed the job in one year.

The San Sebastian Line was now in operation. No surge of trade had comeacross the border, nor any trains loaded with copper. A few carloads cameclattering down the mountains from San Sebastian, at long intervals. Themines, said Francisco d'Anconia, were still in the process of development.The drain on Taggart Transcontinental had not stopped.

Now she sat at the desk in her office, as she had sat for many evenings,trying to work out the problem of what branches could save the system and inhow many years.

The Rio Norte Line, when rebuilt, would redeem the rest. As she looked atthe sheets of figures announcing losses and more losses, she did not think ofthe long, senseless agony of the Mexican venture. She thought of a telephonecall. "Hank, can you save us? Can you give us rail on the shortest notice andthe longest credit possible?" A quiet, steady voice had answered, "Sure."

The thought was a point of support. She leaned over the sheets of paper onher desk, finding it suddenly easier to concentrate. There was one thing, atleast, that could be counted upon not to crumble when needed.

James Taggart crossed the anteroom of Dagny's office, still holding thekind of confidence he had felt among his companions at the barroom half anhour ago. When he opened her door, the confidence vanished. He crossed theroom to her desk like a child being dragged to punishment, storing theresentment for all his future years.

He saw a head bent over sheets of paper, the light of the desk lampglistening on strands of disheveled hair, a white shirt clinging to hershoulders, its loose folds suggesting the thinness of her body.

"What is it, Jim?"

"What are you trying to pull on the San Sebastian Line?"She raised her head. "Pull? Why?"

"What sort of schedule are we running down there and what kind of trains?"She laughed; the sound was gay and a little weary. "You really ought toread the reports sent to the president's office, Jim, once in a while.""What do you mean?"

"We've been running that schedule and those trains on the San Sebastianfor the last three months."

"One passenger train a day?"

"—in the morning. And one freight train every other night."

"Good God! On an important branch like that?"

"The important branch can't pay even for those two trams."

"But the Mexican people expect real service from us!"

"I'm sure they do."

"They need trains!"

"For what?"

"For ... To help them develop local industries. How do you expect themto develop if we don't give them transportation?""I don't expect them to develop,"

"That's just your personal opinion. I don't see what right you had to takeit upon yourself to cut our schedules. Why, the copper traffic alone will payfor everything."

"When?"

He looked at her; his face assumed the satisfaction of a person about toutter something that has the power to hurt. "You don't doubt the success ofthose copper mines, do you?—when it's Francisco d'Anconia who's runningthem?" He stressed the name, watching her.

She said, "He may be your friend, but—"

"My friend? I thought he was yours."

She said steadily, "Not for the last ten years."

"That's too bad, isn't it? Still, he's one of the smartest operators onearth. He's never failed in a venture—I mean, a business venture—and he'ssunk millions of his own money into those mines, so we can rely on hisjudgment."

"When will you realize that Francisco d'Anconia has turned into aworthless bum?"

He chuckled. "I always thought that that's what he was—as far as hispersonal character is concerned. But you didn't share my opinion. Yours wasopposite. Oh my, how opposite! Surely you remember our quarrels on thesubject? Shall I quote some of the things you said about him? I can onlysurmise as to some of the things you did."

"Do you wish to discuss Francisco d'Anconia? Is that what you came herefor?"

His face showed the anger of failure—because hers showed nothing."You know damn well what I came here for!" he snapped. "I've heard someincredible things about our trains in Mexico.""What things?"

"What sort of rolling stock are you using down there?""The worst I could find.""You admit that?"

"I've stated it on paper in the reports I sent you.""Is it true that you're using wood-burning locomotives?""Eddie found them for me in somebody's abandoned roundhouse down inLouisiana. He couldn't even learn the name of the railroad.""And that's what you're running as Taggart trains?""Yes."

"What in hell's the big idea? What's going on? I want to know what's goingon!"

She spoke evenly, looking straight at him. "If you want to know, I haveleft nothing but junk on the San Sebastian Line, and as little of that aspossible. I have moved everything that could be moved—switch engines, shoptools, even typewriters and mirrors—out of Mexico."

"Why in blazes?"

"So that the looters won't have too much to loot when they nationalize theline."

He leaped to his feet. "You won't get away with that! This is one time youwon't get away with it! To have the nerve to pull such a low, unspeakable . .. just because of some vicious rumors, when we have a contract for twohundred years and . . ."

"Jim," she said slowly, "there's not a car, engine or ton of coal that wecan spare anywhere on the system."

"I won't permit it, I absolutely won't permit such an outrageous policytoward a friendly people who need our help. Material greed isn't everything.After all, there are non-material considerations, even though you wouldn'tunderstand them!"

She pulled a pad forward and picked up a pencil. "All right, Jim.

How many trains do you wish me to run on the San Sebastian Line?""Huh?"

"Which runs do you wish me to cut and on which of our lines—in order toget the Diesels and the steel coaches?""I don't want you to cut any runs!""Then where do I get the equipment for Mexico?""That's for you to figure out. It's your job.""I am not able to do it. You will have to decide."

"That's your usual rotten trick—switching the responsibility to me!"

"I'm waiting for orders, Jim."

'Tm not going to let you trap me like that!"

She dropped the pencil. "Then the San Sebastian schedule will remain as itis. "

"Just wait till the Board meeting next month. I'll demand a decision, Onceand for all, on how far the Operating Department is to be permitted to exceedits authority. You're going to have to answer for this."

"Ill answer for it."

She was back at her work before the door had closed on James Taggart.

When she finished, pushed the papers aside and glanced up, the sky wasblack beyond the window, and the city had become a glowing spread of lightedglass without masonry. She rose reluctantly. She resented the small defeat ofbeing tired, but she knew that she was, tonight.

The outer office was dark and empty; her staff had gone. Only EddieWillers was still there, at his desk in his glass-partitioned enclosure thatlooked like a cube of light in a comer of the large room. She waved to him onher way out.

She did not take the elevator to the lobby of the building, but to theconcourse of the Taggart Terminal. She liked to walk through it on her wayhome.

She had always felt that the concourse looked like a temple. Glancing upat the distant ceiling, she saw dim vaults supported by giant granitecolumns, and the tops of vast windows glazed by darkness. The vaulting heldthe solemn peace of a cathedral, spread in protection high above the rushingactivity of men.

Dominating the concourse, but ignored by the travelers as a habitualsight, stood a statue of Nathaniel Taggart, the founder of the railroad.

Dagny was the only one who remained aware of it and had never been able totake it for granted. To look at that statue whenever she crossed theconcourse, was the only form of prayer she knew.

Nathaniel Taggart had been a penniless adventurer who had come fromsomewhere in New England and built a railroad across a continent, in the daysof the first steel rails. His railroad still stood; his battle to build ithad dissolved into a legend, because people preferred not to Understand it orto believe it possible.

He was a man who had never accepted the creed that others had the right tostop him. He set his goal and moved toward it, his way as straight as one ofhis rails. He never sought any loans, bonds, subsidies, land grants orlegislative favors from the government. He obtained money from the men whoowned it, going from door to door—

from the mahogany doors of bankers to the clapboard doors of lonelyfarmhouses. He never talked about the public good. He merely told people thatthey would make big profits on his railroad, he told them why he expected theprofits and he gave his reasons. He had good reasons.

Through all the generations that followed, Taggart Transcontinental wasone of the few railroads that never went bankrupt and the only one whosecontrolling stock remained in the hands of the founder's descendants.

In his lifetime, the name "Nat Taggart" was not famous, but notorious; itwas repeated, not in homage, but in resentful curiosity; and if anyoneadmired him, it was as one admires a successful bandit. Yet no penny of hiswealth had been obtained by force or fraud; he was guilty of nothing, exceptthat he earned his own fortune and never forgot that it was his.

Many stories were whispered about him. It was said that in the wildernessof the Middle West, he murdered a state legislator who attempted to revoke acharter granted to him, to revoke it when his rail was laid halfway acrossthe state; some legislators had planned to make a fortune on Taggart stock—byselling it short. Nat Taggart was indicted for the murder, but the chargecould never be proved. He had no trouble with legislators from then on.

It was said that Nat Taggart had staked his life on his railroad manytimes; but once, he staked more than his life. Desperate for funds, with theconstruction of his line suspended, he threw down three flights of stairs adistinguished gentleman who offered him a loan from the government. Then hepledged his wife as security for a loan from a millionaire who hated him andadmired her beauty. He repaid the loan on time and did not have to surrenderhis pledge. The deal had been made with his wife's consent. She was a greatbeauty from the noblest family of a southern state, and she had beendisinherited by her family because she eloped with Nat Taggart when he wasonly a ragged young adventurer.

Dagny regretted at times that Nat Taggart was her ancestor. What she feltfor him did not belong in the category of unchosen family affections. She didnot want her feeling to be the thing one was supposed to owe an uncle or agrandfather. She was incapable of love for any object not of her own choiceand she resented anyone's demand for it. But had it been possible to choosean ancestor, she would have chosen Nat Taggart, in voluntary homage and withall of her gratitude.

Nat Taggart's statue was copied from an artist's sketch of him, the onlyrecord ever made of his appearance. He had lived far into old age, but onecould never think of him except as he was on that sketch —as a young man. Inher childhood, his statue had been Dagny's first concept of the exalted. Whenshe was sent to church or to school, and heard people using that word, shethought that she knew what they meant: she thought of the statue.

The statue was of a young man with a tall, gaunt body and an angular face.He held his head as if he faced a challenge and found joy in his capacity tomeet it. All that Dagny wanted of life was contained in the desire to holdher head as he did.

Tonight, she looked at the statue when she walked across the concourse. Itwas a moment's rest; it was as if a burden she could not name were lightenedand as if a faint current of air were touching her forehead.

In a corner of the concourse, by the main entrance, there was a smallnewsstand. The owner, a quiet, courteous old man with an air of breeding, hadstood behind his counter for twenty years. He had owned a cigarette factoryonce, but it had gone bankrupt, and he had resigned himself to the lonelyobscurity of his little stand in the midst of an eternal whirlpool ofstrangers. He had no family or friends left alive.

He had a hobby which was his only pleasure: he gathered cigarettes fromall over the world for his private collection; he knew every brand made orthat had ever been made.

Dagny liked to stop at his newsstand on her way out. He seemed to be partof the Taggart Terminal, like an old watchdog too feeble to protect it, butreassuring by the loyalty of his presence. He liked to see her coming,because it amused him to think that he alone knew the importance of the youngwoman in a sports coat and a slanting hat, who came hurrying anonymouslythrough the crowd.

She stopped tonight, as usual, to buy a package of cigarettes. "How is thecollection?" she asked him. "Any new specimens?"

He smiled sadly, shaking his head. "No, Miss Taggart. There aren't any newbrands made anywhere in the world. Even the old ones are going, one afteranother. There's only five or six kinds left selling now.

There used to be dozens. People aren't making anything new any more."

"They will. That's only temporary."

He glanced at her and did not answer. Then he said, "I like cigarettes,Miss Taggart. I like to think of fire held in a man's hand. Fire, a dangerousforce, tamed at his fingertips. I often wonder about the hours when a mansits alone, watching the smoke of a cigarette, thinking. I wonder what greatthings have come from such hours. When a man thinks, there is a spot of firealive in his mind—and it is proper that he should have the burning point of acigarette as his one expression."

"Do they ever think?" she asked involuntarily, and stopped; the questionwas her one personal torture and she did not want to discuss it.

The old man looked as if he had noticed the sudden stop and understood it;but he did not start discussing it; he said, instead, "I don't like the thingthat's happening to people, Miss Taggart."

"What?"

"I don't know. But I've watched them here for twenty years and I've seenthe change. They used to rush through here, and it was wonderful to watch, itwas the hurry of men who knew where they were going and were eager to getthere. Now they're hurrying because they are afraid.

It's not a purpose that drives them, it's fear. They're not goinganywhere, they're escaping. And I don't think they know what it is that theywant to escape. They don't look at one another. They jerk when brushedagainst. They smile too much, but it's an ugly kind of smiling: it's not joy,it's pleading. I don't know what it is that's happening to the world." Heshrugged. "Oh well, who is John Gait?"

"He's just a meaningless phrase!"

She was startled by the sharpness of her own voice, and she added inapology, "I don't like that empty piece of slang. What does it mean?Where did it come from?""Nobody knows," he answered slowly.

"Why do people keep saying it? Nobody seems able to explain just what itstands for, yet they all use it as if they knew the meaning.""Why does it disturb you?" he asked.

"I don't like what they seem to mean when they say it.""I don't, either, Miss Taggart."

Eddie Willers ate his dinners in the employees' cafeteria of the TaggartTerminal. There was a restaurant in the building, patronized by Taggartexecutives, but he did not like it. The cafeteria seemed part of therailroad, and he felt more at home.

The cafeteria lay underground. It was a large room with walls of whitetile that glittered in the reflections of electric lights and looked likesilver brocade. It had a high ceiling, sparkling counters of glass andchromium, a sense of space and light.

There was a railroad worker whom Eddie Willers met at times in thecafeteria. Eddie liked his face. They had been drawn into a chanceconversation once, and then it became their habit to dine together wheneverthey happened to meet.

Eddie had forgotten whether he had ever asked the worker's name or thenature of his job; he supposed that the job wasn't much, because the man'sclothes were rough and grease-stained. The man was not a person to him, butonly a silent presence with an enormous intensity of interest in the onething which was the meaning of his own life: in Taggart Transcontinental.

Tonight, coming down late, Eddie saw the worker at a table in a corner ofthe half-deserted room. Eddie smiled happily, waving to him, and carried histray of food to the worker's table.

In the privacy of their corner, Eddie felt at ease, relaxing after thelong strain of the day. He could talk as he did not talk anywhere else,admitting things he would not confess to anyone, thinking aloud, looking intothe attentive eyes of the worker across the table.

"The Rio Norte Line is our last hope," said Eddie Willers. "But it willsave us. We'll have at least one branch in good condition, where it's neededmost, and that will help to save the rest. . . . It's funny—

isn't it?—to speak about a last hope for Taggart Transcontinental. Do youtake it seriously if somebody tells you that a meteor is going to destroy theearth? ... I don't, either. . . . 'From Ocean to Ocean, forever'—that'swhat we heard all through our childhood, she and I.

No, they didn't say 'forever,' but that's what it meant. . . . You know,I'm not any kind of a great man. I couldn't have built that railroad. If itgoes, I won't be able to bring it back. I'll have to go with it. . . .

Don't pay any attention to me. I don't know why I should want to saythings like that. Guess I'm just a little tired tonight. . . . Yes, I workedlate. She didn't ask me to stay, but there was a light under her door, longafter all the others had gone . . . Yes, she's gone home now. . . .

Trouble? Oh, there's always trouble in the office. But she's not worried.

She knows she can pull us through. ... Of course, it's bad. We're havingmany more accidents than you hear about. We lost two Diesels again, lastweek. One—just from old age, the other—in a head-on collision. . . . Yes, wehave Diesels on order, at the United Locomotive Works, but we've waited forthem for two years. I don't know whether we'll ever get them or not. . . .God, do we need them! Motive power —you can't imagine how important that is.That's the heart of everything. . . . What are you smiling at? . . . Well, asI was saying, it's bad. But at least the Rio Norte Line is set. The firstshipment of rail will get to the site in a few weeks. In a year, we'll runthe first train on the new track. Nothing's going to stop us, this time. . .. Sure, I know who's going to lay the rail. McNamara, of Cleveland. He's thecontractor who finished the San Sebastian Line for us. There, at least, isone man who knows his job. So we're safe. We can count on him. There aren'tmany good contractors left. . . . We're rushed as hell, but I like it. I'vebeen coming to the office an hour earlier than usual, but she beats me to it.She's always there first. . . . What? ... I don't know what she does atnight. Nothing much, I guess. . . . No, she never goes out with anyone. Shesits at home, mostly, and listens to music. She plays records. . . . What doyou care, which records? Richard Halley.

She loves the music of Richard Halley. Outside the railroad, that's theonly thing she loves."

CHAPTER IVTHE IMMOVABLE MOVERS

Motive power—thought Dagny, looking up at the Taggart Building in thetwilight—was its first need; motive power, to keep that building standing;movement, to keep it immovable. It did not rest on piles driven into graniteit rested on the engines that rolled across a continent.

She felt a dim touch of anxiety. She was back from a trip to the plant ofthe United Locomotive Works in New Jersey, where she had gone to see thepresident of the company in person. She had learned nothing: neither thereason for the delays nor any indication of the date when the Diesel engineswould be produced. The president of the company had talked to her for twohours. But none of his answers had connected to any of her questions. Hismanner had conveyed a peculiar note of condescending reproach whenever sheattempted to make the conversation specific, as if she were giving proof ofill-breeding by breaking some unwritten code known to everyone else.

On her way through the plant, she had seen an enormous piece of machineryleft abandoned in a corner of the yard. It had been a precision machine toolonce, long ago, of a kind that could not be bought anywhere now. It had notbeen worn out; it had been rotted by neglect, eaten by rust and the blackdrippings of a dirty oil. She had turned her face away from it. A sight ofthat nature always blinded her for an instant by the burst of too violent ananger. She did not know why; she could not define her own feeling; she knewonly that there was, in her feeling, a scream of protest against injustice,and that it was a response to something much beyond an old piece ofmachinery.

The rest of her staff had gone, when she entered the anteroom of heroffice, but Eddie Willers was still there, waiting for her. She knew at oncethat something had happened, by the way he looked and the way he followed hesilently into her office.

"What's the matter, Eddie?"

"McNamara quit."

She looked at him blankly. "What do you mean, quit?""Left. Retired. Went out of business.""McNamara, our contractor?""Yes"

"But that's impossible!""I know it.""What happened? Why?""Nobody knows."

Taking her time deliberately, she unbuttoned her coat, sat down at herdesk, started to pull off her gloves. Then she said, "Begin at the beginningEddie. Sit down."

He spoke quietly, but he remained standing. "I talked to his chiefengineer, long distance. The chief engineer called from Cleveland, to tellus. That's all he said. He knew nothing else."

"What did he say?"

"That McNamara has closed his business and gone.""Where?"

"He doesn't know. Nobody knows."

She noticed that she was holding with one hand two empty fingers of theglove of the other, the glove half-removed and forgotten. She pulled it offand dropped it on the desk.

Eddie said, "He's walked out on a pile of contracts that are worth afortune. He had a waiting list of clients for the next three years. . . ."

She said nothing. He added, his voice low, "I wouldn't be frightened if Icould understand it. . . . But a thing that can't have any possible reason .. ." She remained silent. "He was the best contractor in the country."

They looked at each other. What she wanted to say was, "Oh God, Eddie!"Instead, her voice even, she said, "Don't worry. We'll find anothercontractor for the Rio Norte Line,"

It was late when she left her office. Outside, on the sidewalk at the doorof the building, she paused, looking at the streets. She felt suddenly emptyof energy, of purpose, of desire, as if a motor had crackled and stopped.

A faint glow streamed from behind the buildings into the sky, thereflection of thousands of unknown lights, the electric breath of the city.

She wanted to rest. To rest, she thought, and to find enjoyment somewhere.

Her work was all she had or wanted. But there were times, like tonight,when she felt that sudden, peculiar emptiness, which was not emptiness, butsilence, not despair, but immobility, as if nothing within her weredestroyed, but everything stood still. Then she felt the wish to find amoment's joy outside, the wish to be held as a passive spectator by some workor sight of greatness. Not to make it, she thought, but to accept; not tobegin, but to respond; not to create, but to admire. I need it to let me goon, she thought, because joy is one's fuel.

She had always been—she closed her eyes with a faint smile of amusementand pain—the motive power of her own happiness. For once, she wanted to feelherself carried by the power of someone else's achievement. As men on a darkprairie liked to see the lighted windows of a train going past, herachievement, the sight of power and purpose that gave them reassurance in themidst of empty miles and night —so she wanted to feel it for a moment, abrief greeting, a single glimpse, just to wave her arm and say: Someone isgoing somewhere. . . .

She started walking slowly, her hands in the pockets of her coat, theshadow of her slanting hat brim across her face. The buildings around herrose to such heights that her glance could not find the sky. She thought: Ithas taken so much to build this city, it should have so much to offer.

Above the door of a shop, the black hole of a radio loudspeaker washurling sounds at the streets. They were the sounds of a symphony concertbeing given somewhere in the city. They were a long screech without shape, asof cloth and flesh being torn at random. They scattered with no melody, noharmony, no rhythm to hold them. If music was emotion and emotion came fromthought, then this was the scream of chaos, of the irrational, of thehelpless, of man's self-abdication.

She walked on. She stopped at the window of a bookstore. The windowdisplayed a pyramid of slabs in brownish-purple jackets, inscribed: TheVulture Is Molting. "The novel of our century," said a placard.

"The penetrating study of a businessman's greed. A fearless revelation ofman's depravity."

She walked past a movie theater. Its lights wiped out half a block,leaving only a huge photograph and some letters suspended in blazing mid-air.The photograph was of a smiling young woman; looking at her face, one feltthe weariness of having seen it for years, even while seeing it for the firsttime. The letters said: ". . . in a momentous drama giving the answer to thegreat problem: Should a woman tell?"

She walked past the door of a night club. A couple came staggering out toa taxicab. The girl had blurred eyes, a perspiring face, an ermine cape and abeautiful evening gown that had slipped off one shoulder like a slovenlyhousewife's bathrobe, revealing too much of her breast, not in a manner ofdaring, but in the manner of a drudge's indifference. Her escort steered her,gripping her naked arm; his face did not have the expression of a man

anticipating a romantic adventure, but the sly look of a boy out to writeobscenities on fences.

What had she hoped to find?—she thought, walking on. These were the thingsmen lived by, the forms of their spirit, of their culture, of theirenjoyment. She had seen nothing else anywhere, not for many years.

At the corner of the street where she lived, she bought a newspaper andwent home.

Her apartment was two rooms on the top floor of a skyscraper. The sheetsof glass in the corner window of her living room made it look like the prowof a ship in motion, and the lights of the city were like phosphorescentsparks on the black waves of steel and stone. When she turned on a lamp, longtriangles of shadow cut the bare walls, in a geometrical pattern of lightrays broken by a few angular pieces of furniture.

She stood in the middle of the room, alone between sky and city.

There was only one thing that could give her the feeling she wanted toexperience tonight; it was the only form of enjoyment she had found.

She turned to a phonograph and put on a record of the music of RichardHalley.

It was his Fourth Concerto, the last work he had written. The crash of itsopening chords swept the sights of the streets away from her mind.

The Concerto was a great cry of rebellion. It was a "No" flung at somevast process of torture, a denial of suffering, a denial that held the agonyof the struggle to break free. The sounds were like a voice saying: There isno necessity for pain—why, then, is the worst pain reserved for those whowill not accept its necessity?—we who hold the love and the secret of joy, towhat punishment have we been sentenced for it, and by whom? . . . The soundsof torture became defiance, the statement of agony became a hymn to a distantvision for whose sake anything was worth enduring, even this. It was the songof rebellion—and of a desperate quest.

She sat still, her eyes closed, listening.

No one knew what had happened to Richard Halley, or why. The story of hislife had been like a summary written to damn greatness by showing the priceone pays for it. It had been a procession of years spent in garrets andbasements, years that had taken the gray tinge of the walls imprisoning a manwhose music overflowed with violent color.

It had been the gray of a struggle against long flights of unlightedtenement stairs, against frozen plumbing, against the price of a sandwich inan ill-smelling delicatessen store, against the faces of men who listened tomusic, their eyes empty. It had been a struggle without the relief ofviolence, without the recognition of finding a conscious enemy, with only adeaf wall to batter, a wall of the most effective soundproofing:indifference, that swallowed blows, chords and screams—a battle of silence,for a man who could give to sounds a greater eloquence than they had evercarried—the silence of obscurity, of loneliness, of the nights when some rareorchestra played one of his works and he looked at the darkness, knowing thathis soul went in trembling, widening circles from a radio tower through theair of the city, but there were no receivers tuned to hear it.

"The music of Richard Halley has a quality of the heroic. Our age hasoutgrown that stuff," said one critic. "The music of Richard Halley is out ofkey with our times. It has a tone of ecstasy. Who cares for ecstasynowadays?" said another.

His life had been a summary of the lives of all the men whose reward is amonument in a public park a hundred years after the time when a reward canmatter—except that Richard Halley did not die soon enough. He lived to seethe night which, by the accepted laws of history, he was not supposed to see.He was forty-three years old and it was the opening night of Phaethon, anopera he had written at the age of twenty-four. He had changed the ancient

Greek myth to his own purpose and meaning: Phaethon, the young son of Helios,who stole his father's chariot and, in ambitious audacity, attempted to drivethe sun across the sky, did not perish, as he perished in the myth; inHalley's opera, Phaethon succeeded. The opera had been performed then,nineteen years ago, and had closed after one performance, to the sound ofbooing and catcalls. That night, Richard Halley had walked the streets of thecity till dawn, trying to find an answer to a question, which he did notfind.

On the night when the opera was presented again, nineteen years later, thelast sounds of the music crashed into the sounds of the greatest ovation theopera house had ever heard. The ancient walls could not contain it, thesounds of cheering burst through to the lobbies, to the stairs, to thestreets, to the boy who had walked those streets nineteen years ago.

Dagny was in the audience on the night of the ovation. She was one of thefew who had known the music of Richard Halley much earlier; but she had neverseen him. She saw him being pushed out on the stage, saw him facing theenormous spread of waving arms and cheering heads. He stood without moving, atall, emaciated man with graying hair. He did not bow, did not smile; he juststood there, looking at the crowd. His face had the quiet, earnest look of aman staring at a question.

"The music of Richard Halley, " wrote a critic next morning, "belongs tomankind. It is the product and the expression of the greatness of thepeople." "There is an inspiring lesson," said a minister, "in the life ofRichard Halley. He has had a terrible struggle, but what does that matter? Itis proper, it is noble that he should have endured suffering, injustice,abuse at the hands of his brothers—in order to enrich their lives and teachthem to appreciate the beauty of great music."

On the day after the opening, Richard Halley retired.

He gave no explanation. He merely told his publishers that his career wasover. He sold them the rights to his works for a modest sum, even though heknew that his royalties would now bring him a fortune. He went away, leavingno address. It was eight years ago; no one had seen him since.

Dagny listened to the Fourth Concerto, her head thrown back, her eyesclosed. She lay half-stretched across the corner of a couch, her body relaxedand still; but tension stressed the shape of her mouth on her motionlessface, a sensual shape drawn in lines of longing.

After a while, she opened her eyes. She noticed the newspaper she hadthrown down on the couch. She reached for it absently, to turn the vapidheadlines out of sight. The paper fell open. She saw the photograph of a faceshe knew, and the heading of a story. She slammed the pages shut and flungthem aside.

It was the face of Francisco d'Anconia. The heading said that he hadarrived in New York. What of it?—she thought. She would not have to see him.She had not seen him for years.

She sat looking down at the newspaper on the floor. Don't read it, shethought; don't look at it. But the face, she thought, had not changed.

How could a face remain the same when everything else was gone? She wishedthey had not caught a picture of him when he smiled. That kind of smile didnot belong in the pages of a newspaper. It was the smile of a man who is ableto see, to know and to create the glory of existence. It was the mocking,challenging smile of a brilliant intelligence.

Don't read it, she thought; not now—not to that music—oh, not to thatmusic!

She reached for the paper and opened it.

The story said that Senor Francisco d'Anconia had granted an interview tothe press in his suite at the Wayne-Falkland Hotel. He said that he had cometo New York for two important reasons: a hat-check girl at the Cub Club, and

the liverwurst at Moe's Delicatessen on Third Avenue. He had nothing to sayabout the coming divorce trial of Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Vail. Mrs. Vail, alady of noble breeding and unusual loveliness, had taken a shot at herdistinguished young husband, some months ago, publicly declaring that shewished to get rid of him for the sake of her lover, Francisco d'Anconia. Shehad given to the press a detailed account of her secret romance, including adescription of the night of last New Year's Eve which she had spent atd'Anconia's villa in the Andes. Her husband had survived the shot and hadsued for divorce.

She had countered with a suit for half of her husband's millions, and witha recital of his private life which, she said, made hers look innocent.

All of that had been splashed over the newspapers for weeks. But Senord'Anconia had nothing to say about it, when the reporters questioned him.Would he deny Mrs. Vail's story, they asked. "I never deny anything," heanswered. The reporters had been astonished by his sudden arrival in town;they had thought that he would not wish to be there just when the worst ofthe scandal was about to explode on the front pages. But they had been wrong.Francisco d'Anconia added one more comment to the reasons for his arrival. "Iwanted to witness the farce,"

he said.

Dagny let the paper slip to the floor. She sat, bent over, her head on herarms. She did not move, but the strands of hair, hanging down to her knees,trembled in sudden jolts once in a while.

The great chords of Halley's music went on, filling the room, piercing theglass of the windows, streaming out over the city. She was hearing the music.It was her quest, her cry.

James Taggart glanced about the living room of his apartment, wonderingwhat time it was; he did not feel like moving to find his watch.

He sat in an armchair, dressed in wrinkled pajamas, barefooted; it was toomuch trouble to look for his slippers. The light of the gray sky in thewindows hurt his eyes, still sticky with sleep. He felt, inside his skull,the nasty heaviness which is about to become a headache. He wondered angrilywhy he had stumbled out into the living room. Oh yes, he remembered, to lookfor the time.

He slumped sidewise over the arm of the chair and caught sight of a clockon a distant building: it was twenty minutes past noon.

Through the open door of the bedroom, he heard Betty Pope washing herteeth in the bathroom beyond. Her girdle lay on the floor, by the side of achair with the rest of her clothes; the girdle was a faded pink, with brokenstrands of rubber.

"Hurry up, will you?" he called irritably. "I've got to dress,"

She did not answer. She had left the door of the bathroom open; he couldhear the sound of gargling.

Why do I do those things?—he thought, remembering last night. But it wastoo much trouble to look for an answer.

Betty Pope came into the living room, dragging the folds of a satinnegligee harlequin-checkered in orange and purple. She looked awful in anegligee, thought Taggart; she was ever so much better in a riding habit, inthe photographs on the society pages of the newspapers. She was a lanky girl,all bones and loose joints that did not move smoothly.

She had a homely face, a bad complexion and a look of impertinentcondescension derived from the fact that she belonged to one of the very bestfamilies.

"Aw, hell!" she said at nothing in particular, stretching herself tolimber up. "Jim, where are your nail clippers? I've got to trim my toenails.""I don't know. I have a headache. Do it at home."

"You look unappetizing in the morning." she said indifferently. "You looklike a snail."

"Why don't you shut up?"

She wandered aimlessly about the room. "I don't want to go home,"

she said with no particular feeling. "I hate morning. Here's another dayand nothing to do. I've got a tea session on for this afternoon, at LizBlane's. Oh well, it might be fun, because Liz is a bitch." She picked up aglass and swallowed the stale remnant of a drink. "Why don't you have themrepair your air-conditioner? This place smells."

"Are you through in the bathroom?" he asked. "I have to dress. I have animportant engagement today."

"Go right in. I don't mind. I'll share the bathroom with you. I hate to berushed. "

While he shaved, he saw her dressing in front of the open bathroom door.She took a long time twisting herself into her girdle, hooking garters to herstockings, pulling on an ungainly, expensive tweed suit.

The harlequin negligee, picked from an advertisement in the smartestfashion magazine, was like a uniform which she knew to be expected on certainoccasions, which she had worn dutifully for a specified purpose and thendiscarded.

The nature of their relationship had the same quality. There was nopassion in it, no desire, no actual pleasure, not even a sense of shame.

To them, the act of sex was neither joy nor sin. It meant nothing. Theyhad heard that men and women were supposed to sleep together, so they did.

"Jim, why don't you take me to the Armenian restaurant tonight?"

she asked. "I love shish-kebab."

"I can't," he answered angrily through the soap lather on his face."I've got a busy day ahead.""Why don't you cancel it?""What?"

"Whatever it is."

"It is very important, my dear. It is a meeting of our Board ofDirectors."

"Oh, don't be stuffy about your damn railroad. It's boring. I hatebusinessmen. They're dull."He did not answer.

She glanced at him slyly, and her voice acquired a livelier note when shedrawled, "Jock Benson said that you have a soft snap on that railroad anyway,because it's your sister who runs the whole works."

"Oh, he did, did he?"

"I think that your sister is awful. I think it's disgusting—a woman actinglike a grease-monkey and posing around like a big executive. It's sounfeminine. Who does she think she is, anyway?"

Taggart stepped out to the threshold. He leaned against the doorjamb,studying Betty Pope. There was a faint smile on his face, sarcastic andconfident. They had, he thought, a bond in common.

"It might interest you to know, my dear," he said, "that I'm putting theskids under my sister this afternoon."

"No?" she said, interested. "Really?"

"And that is why this Board meeting is so important.""Are you really going to kick her out?"

"No. That's not necessary or advisable. I shall merely put her in herplace. It's the chance I've been waiting for.""You got something on her? Some scandal?"

"No, no. You wouldn't understand. It's merely that she's gone too far, foronce, and she's going to get slapped down. She's pulled an inexcusable sortof stunt, without consulting anybody. It's a serious offense against our

Mexican neighbors. When the Board hears about it, they'll pass a couple ofnew rulings on the Operating Department, which will make my sister a littleeasier to manage."

"You're smart, Jim," she said.

"I'd better get dressed." He sounded pleased. He turned back to thewashbowl, adding cheerfully, "Maybe I will take you out tonight and buy yousome shish-kebab."

The telephone rang.

He lifted the receiver. The operator announced a long-distance call fromMexico City.

The hysterical voice that came on the wire was that of his political manin Mexico.

"I couldn't help it, Jim!" it gulped. "I couldn't help it! . . . We had nowarning, I swear to God, nobody suspected, nobody saw it coming, I've done mybest, you can't blame me, Jim, it was a bolt out of the blue! The decree cameout this morning, just five minutes ago, they sprang it on us like that,without any notice! The government of the People's State of Mexico hasnationalized the San Sebastian Mines and the San Sebastian Railroad."

". . . and, therefore, I can assure the gentlemen of the Board that thereis no occasion for panic. The event of this morning is a regrettabledevelopment, but I have full confidence—based on my knowledge of the innerprocesses shaping our foreign policy in Washington—that our government willnegotiate an equitable settlement with the government of the People's Stateof Mexico, and that we will receive full and just compensation for ourproperty."

James Taggart stood at the long table, addressing the Board of Directors.His voice was precise and monotonous; it connoted safety.

"I am glad to report, however, that I foresaw the possibility of such aturn of events and took every precaution to protect the interests of TaggartTranscontinental. Some months ago, I instructed our Operating Department tocut the schedule on the San Sebastian Line down to a single train a day, andto remove from it our best motive power and rolling stock, as well as everypiece of equipment that could be moved.

The Mexican government was able to seize nothing but a few wooden cars andone superannuated locomotive. My decision has saved the company many millionsof dollars—I shall have the exact figures computed and submit them to you. Ido feel, however, that our stockholders will be justified in expecting thatthose who bore the major responsibility for this venture should now bear theconsequences of their negligence. I would suggest, therefore, that we requestthe resignation of Mr. Clarence Eddington, our economic consultant, whorecommended the construction of the San Sebastian Line, and of Mr. JulesMott, our representative in Mexico City."

The men sat around the long table, listening. They did not think of whatthey would have to do, but of what they would have to say to the men theyrepresented. Taggart's speech gave them what they needed.

Orren Boyle was waiting for him, when Taggart returned to his office. Oncethey were alone, Taggart's manner changed. He leaned against the desk,sagging, his face loose and white.

"Well?" he asked.

Boyle spread his hands out helplessly. "I've checked, Jim," he said.

"It's straight all right; d'Anconia's lost fifteen million dollars of hisown money in those mines. No, there wasn't anything phony about that, hedidn't pull any sort of trick, he put up his own cash and now he's lost it."

"Well, what's he going to do about it?"

"That-I don't know. Nobody does."

"He's not going to let himself be robbed, is he? He's too smart for that.He must have something up his sleeve."

"I sure hope so."

"He's outwitted some of the slickest combinations of money-grubbers onearth. Is he going to be taken by a bunch of Greaser politicians with adecree? He must have something on them, and he'll get the last word, and wemust be sure to be in on it, too!"

"That's up to you, Jim. You're his friend."

"Friend be damned! I hate his guts."

He pressed a button for his secretary. The secretary entered uncertainly,looking unhappy; he was a young man, no longer too young, with a bloodlessface and the well-bred manner of genteel poverty.

"Did you get me an appointment with Francisco d'Anconia?" snapped Taggart.

"No, sir."

"But, God damn it, I told you to call the—""I wasn't able to, sir. I have tried.""Well, try again."

"I mean I wasn't able to obtain the appointment, Mr. Taggart."

"Why not?"

"He declined it."

"You mean he refused to see me?"

"Yes, sir, that is what I mean."

"He wouldn't see me?"

"No, sir, he wouldn't."

"Did you speak to him in person?"

"No, sir, I spoke to his secretary."

"What did he tell you? Just what did he say?" The young man hesitated andlooked more unhappy. "What did he say?"

"He said that Senior d'Anconia said that you bore him, Mr. Taggart."

The proposal which they passed was known as the "Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule."When they voted for it, the members of the National Alliance of Railroads satin a large hall in the deepening twilight of a late autumn evening and didnot look at one another.

The National Alliance of Railroads was an organization formed, it wasclaimed, to protect the welfare of the railroad industry. This was to beachieved by developing methods of co-operation for a common purpose; this wasto be achieved by the pledge of every member to subordinate his own intereststo those of the industry as a whole; the interests of the industry as a wholewere to be determined by a majority vote, and every member was committed toabide by any decision the majority chose to make.

"Members of the same profession or of the same industry should sticktogether," the organizers of the Alliance had said. "We all have the sameproblems, the same interests, the same enemies. We waste our energy fightingone another, instead of presenting a common front to the world.

We can all grow and prosper together, if we pool our efforts." "Againstwhom is this Alliance being organized?" a skeptic had asked. The answer hadbeen: "Why, it's not 'against' anybody. But if you want to put it that way,why, it's against shippers or supply manufacturers or anyone who might try totake advantage of us. Against whom is any union organized?" "That's what Iwonder about," the skeptic had said.

When the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule was offered to the vote of the fullmembership of the National Alliance of Railroads at its annual meeting, itwas the first mention of this Rule in public. But all the members had heardof it; it had been discussed privately for a long tune, and more insistentlyin the last few months. The men who sat in the large hall of the meeting werethe presidents of the railroads. They did not like the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule;they had hoped it would never be brought up.

But when it was brought up, they voted for it.

No railroad was mentioned by name in the speeches that preceded thevoting. The speeches dealt only with the public welfare. It was said thatwhile the public welfare was threatened by shortages of transportation,railroads were destroying one another through vicious competition, on "thebrutal policy of dog-eat-dog." While there existed blighted areas where railservice had been discontinued, there existed at the same time large regionswhere two or more railroads were competing for a traffic barely sufficientfor one. It was said that there were great opportunities for youngerrailroads in the blighted areas. While it was true that such areas offeredlittle economic incentive at present, a public-spirited railroad, it wassaid, would undertake to provide transportation for the strugglinginhabitants, since the prime purpose of a railroad was public service, notprofit.

Then it was said that large, established railroad systems were essentialto the public welfare; and that the collapse of one of them would be anational catastrophe; and that if one such system had happened to sustain acrushing loss in a public-spirited attempt to contribute to internationalgood will, it was entitled to public support to help it survive the blow.

No railroad was mentioned by name. But when the chairman of the meetingraised his hand, as a solemn signal that they were about to vote, everybodylooked at Dan Conway, president of the Phoenix-Durango.

There were only five dissenters who voted against it. Yet when thechairman announced that the measure had passed, there was no cheering, nosounds of approval, no movement, nothing but a heavy silence.

To the last minute, every one of them had hoped that someone would savethem from it.

The Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule was described as a measure of "voluntary self-regulation" intended "the better to enforce" the laws long since passed bythe country's Legislature. The Rule provided that the members of the NationalAlliance of Railroads were forbidden to engage in practices defined as"destructive competition"; that in regions declared to be restricted, no morethan one railroad would be permitted to operate; that in such regions,seniority belonged to the oldest railroad now operating there, and that thenewcomers, who had encroached unfairly upon its territory, would suspendoperations within nine months after being so ordered; that the ExecutiveBoard of the National Alliance of Railroads was empowered to decide, at itssole discretion, which regions were to be restricted.

When the meeting adjourned, the men hastened to leave. There were noprivate discussions, no friendly loitering. The great hall became deserted inan unusually short time. Nobody spoke to or looked at Dan Conway.

In the lobby of the building, James Taggart met Orren Boyle. They had madeno appointment to meet, but Taggart saw a bulky figure outlined against amarble wall and knew who it was before he saw the face. They approached eachother, and Boyle said, his smile less soothing than usual, "I've delivered.Your turn now, Jimmie." "You didn't have to come here. Why did you?" saidTaggart sullenly. "Oh, just for the fun of it," said Boyle.

Dan Conway sat alone among rows of empty seats. He was still!

there when the charwoman came to clean the hall. When she hailed him, herose obediently and shuffled to the door. Passing her in the aisle, hefumbled in his pocket and handed her a five dollar bill, silently, meekly,not looking at her face. He did not seem to know what he was doing; he actedas if he thought that he was in some place where generosity demanded that hegive a tip before leaving.

Dagny was still at her desk when the door of her office flew open andJames Taggart rushed in. It was the first time he had ever entered in suchmanner. His face looked feverish.

She had not seen him since the nationalization of the San Sebastian Line.He had not sought to discuss it with her, and she had said nothing about it.She had been proved right so eloquently, she had thought, that comments wereunnecessary. A feeling which was part courtesy, part mercy had stopped herfrom stating to him the conclusion to be drawn from the events. In all reasonand justice, there was but one conclusion he could draw. She had heard abouthis speech to the Board of Directors. She had shrugged, contemptuouslyamused; if it served his purpose, whatever that was, to appropriate herachievements, then, for his own advantage, if for no other reason, he wouldleave her free to achieve, from now on.

"So you think you're the only one who's doing anything for this railroad?"

She looked at Mm, bewildered. His voice was shrill; he stood in front ofher desk, tense with excitement.

"So you think that I've ruined the company, don't you?" he yelled.

"And now you're the only one who can save us? Think I have no way to makeup for the Mexican loss?"

She asked slowly, "What do you want?"

"I want to tell you some news. Do you remember the Anti-dog-eat dogproposal of the Railroad Alliance that I told you about months ago?You didn't like the idea. You didn't like it at all.""I remember. What about it?""It has been passed.""What has been passed?"

"The Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule. Just a few minutes ago. At the meeting.Nine months from now, there's not going to be any Phoenix-Durango Railroadin Colorado!"

A glass ashtray crashed to the floor off the desk, as she leaped to herfeet.

"You rotten bastards!"

He stood motionless. He was smiling.

She knew that she was shaking, open to him, without defense, and that thiswas the sight he enjoyed, but it did not matter to her. Then she saw hissmile—and suddenly the blinding anger vanished. She felt nothing. She studiedthat smile with a cold, impersonal curiosity.

They stood facing each other. He looked as if, for the first time, he wasnot afraid of her. He was gloating. The event meant something to him muchbeyond the destruction of a competitor. It was not a victory over Dan Conway,but over her. She did not know why or in what manner, but she felt certainthat he knew.

For the flash of one instant, she thought that here, before her, in JamesTaggart and in that which made him smile, was a secret she had neversuspected, and it was crucially important that she learn to understand it.But the thought flashed and vanished.

She whirled to the door of a closet and seized her coat.

"Where are you going?" Taggart's voice had dropped; it soundeddisappointed and faintly worried.

She did not answer. She rushed out of the office.

"Dan, you have to fight them. I'll help you. I'll fight for you witheverything I've got."

Dan Conway shook his head.

He sat at his desk, the empty expanse of a faded blotter before him, onefeeble lamp lighted in a corner of the room. Dagny had rushed straight to thecity office of the Phoenix-Durango. Conway was there, and he still sat as shehad found him. He had smiled at her entrance and said, "Funny, I thought youwould come," his voice gentle, lifeless.

They did not know each other well, but they had met a few times inColorado.

"No," he said, "it's no use."

"Do you mean because of that Alliance agreement that you signed?

It won't hold. This is plain expropriation. No court will uphold it. Andif Jim tries to hide behind the usual looters' slogan of 'public welfare,'

I'll go on the stand and swear that Taggart Transcontinental can't handlethe whole traffic of Colorado, And if any court rules against you, you canappeal and keep on appealing for the next ten years."

"Yes," he said, "I could . . .I'm not sure I'd win, but I could try and Icould hang onto the railroad for a few years longer, but . . . No, it's notthe legal points that I'm thinking about, one way or the other. It's notthat."

"What, then?"

"I don't want to fight it, Dagny."

She looked at him incredulously. It was the one sentence which, she feltsure, he had never uttered before; a man could not reverse himself so late inlife.

Dan Conway was approaching fifty. He had the square, stolid, stubborn faceof a tough freight engineer, rather than a company president; the face of afighter, with a young, tanned skin and graying hair. He had taken over ashaky little railroad in Arizona, a road whose net revenue was "less thanthat of a successful grocery store, and he had built it into the bestrailroad of the Southwest. He spoke little, seldom read books, had never goneto college. The whole sphere of human endeavors, with one exception, left himblankly indifferent; he had no touch of that which people called culture. Buthe knew railroads.

"Why don't you want to fight?"

"Because they had the right to do it."

"Dan," she asked, "have you lost your mind?"

"I've never gone back on my word in my life," he said tonelessly. "I don'tcare what the courts decide. I promised to obey the majority. I have toobey."

"Did you expect the majority to do this to you?"

"No." There was a kind of faint convulsion in the stolid face. He spokesoftly, not looking at her, the helpless astonishment still raw within him."No, I didn't expect it. I heard them talking about it for over a year, but Ididn't believe it. Even when they were voting, I didn't believe it."

"What did you expect?"

"I thought . . . They said all of us were to stand for the common good. Ithought what I had done down there in Colorado was good.Good for everybody."

"Oh, you damn fool! Don't you see that that's what you're being punishedfor—because it was good?"

He shook his head. "I don't understand it," he said. "But I see no wayout. "

"Did you promise them to agree to destroy yourself?""There doesn't seem to be any choice for any of us.""What do you mean?"

"Dagny, the whole world's in a terrible state right now. I don't knowwhat's wrong with it, but something's very wrong. Men have to get togetherand find a way out. But who's to decide which way to take, unless it's themajority? I guess that's the only fair method of deciding, I don't see anyother. I suppose somebody's got to be sacrificed. If it turned out to be me,I have no right to complain. The right's on their side. Men have to gettogether."

She made an effort to speak calmly; she was trembling with anger.

"If that's the price of getting together, then I'll be damned if I want tolive on the same earth with any human beings! If the rest of them can surviveonly by destroying us, then why should we wish them to survive?

Nothing can make self-immolation proper. Nothing can give them the rightto turn men into sacrificial animals. Nothing can make it moral to destroythe best. One can't be punished for being good. One can't be penalized forability. If that is right, then we'd better start slaughtering one another,because there isn't any right at all in the world!"

He did not answer. He looked at her helplessly.

"If it's that kind of world, how can we live in it?" she asked."I don't know . . ."he whispered.

"Dan, do you really think it's right? In all truth, deep down, do youthink it's right?"

He closed his eyes. "No," he said. Then he looked at her and she saw alook of torture for the first time. "That's what I've been sitting heretrying to understand. I know that I ought to think it's right—but I can't.It's as if my tongue wouldn't turn to say it. I keep seeing every tie of thetrack down there, every signal light, every bridge, every night that I spentwhen . . ." His head dropped down on his arms. "Oh God, it's so damn unjust!"

"Dan," she said through her teeth, "fight it."

He raised his head. His eyes were empty. "No," he said. "It would bewrong- I'm just selfish."

"Oh, damn that rotten tripe! You know better than that!"

"I don't know . . ." His voice was very tired. "I've been sitting here,trying to think about it ... I don't know what is right any more. . . ."

He added, "I don't think I care."

She knew suddenly that all further words were useless and that Dan Conwaywould never be a man of action again. She did not know what made her certainof it. She said, wondering, "You've never given up in the face of a battlebefore."

"No, I guess I haven't. . . ."He spoke with a quiet, indifferentastonishment. "I've fought storms and floods and rock slides and railfissure. ... I knew how to do it, and I liked doing it. . . . But this kindof battle—it's one I can't fight."

"Why?"

"I don't know. Who knows why the world is what it if-? Oh, who is JohnGait?"

She winced. "Then what are you going to do?""I don't know . . ."I mean—" She stopped.

He knew what she meant. "Oh, there's always something to do. . . ."

He spoke without conviction. "I guess it's only Colorado and New Mexicothat they're going to declare restricted. I'll still have the line in Arizonato run." He added, "As it was twenty years ago . . .

Well, it will keep me busy. I'm getting tired, Dagny. I didn't take timeto notice it, but I guess I am."

She could say nothing.

"I'm not going to build a line through one of their blighted areas,"

he said in the same indifferent voice. "That's what they tried to hand mefor a consolation prize, but I think it's just talk. You can't build arailroad where there's nothing for hundreds of miles but a couple of farmerswho're not growing enough to feed themselves. You can't build a road and makeit pay. If you don't make it pay, who's going to? It doesn't make sense tome. They just didn't know what they were saying."

"Oh, to hell with their blighted areas! It's you I'm thinking about."

She had to name it. "What will you do with yourself?"

"I don't know . . . Well, there's a lot of things I haven't had time todo. Fishing, for instance. I've always liked fishing. Maybe I'll startreading books, always meant to. Guess I'll take it easy now. Guess I'll gofishing. There's some nice places down in Arizona, where it's peaceful andquiet and you don't have to see a human being for miles. . . ."

He glanced up at her and added, "Forget it. Why should you worry aboutme?"

"It's not about you, it's . . . Dan," she said suddenly, "I hope you knowit's not for your sake that I wanted to help you fight."

He smiled; it was a faint, friendly smile. "I know," he said.

"It's not out of pity or charity or any ugly reason like that. Look, Iintended to give you the battle of your life, down there in Colorado.

I intended to cut into your business and squeeze you to the wall and driveyou out, if necessary,"

He chuckled faintly; it was appreciation. "You would have made a prettygood try at it, too," he said.

"Only I didn't think it would be necessary. I thought there was enoughroom there for both of us."

"Yes," he said. "There was."

"Still, if I found that there wasn't, I would have fought you, and if Icould make my road better than yours, I'd have broken you and not given adamn about what happened to you. But this . . . Dan, I don't think I want tolook at our Rio Norte Line now. I ... Oh God, Dan, I don't want to be alooter! "

He looked at her silently for a moment. It was an odd look, as if from agreat distance. He said softly, "You should have been born about a hundredyears earlier, kid. Then you would have had a chance."

"To hell with that. I intend to make my own chance."

"That's what I intended at your age."

"You succeeded."

"Have I?"

She sat still, suddenly unable to move.

He sat up straight and said sharply, almost as if he were issuing orders,"You'd better look at that Rio Norte Line of yours, and you'd better do itfast. Get it ready before I move out, because if you don't, that will be theend of Ellis Wyatt and all the rest of them down there, and they're the bestpeople left in the country. You can't let that happen. It's all on yourshoulders now. It would be no use trying to explain to your brother that it'sgoing to be much tougher for you down there without me to compete with. Butyou and I know it. So go to it. Whatever you do, you won't be a looter. Nolooter could run a railroad in that part of the country and last at it.Whatever you make down there, you will have earned it. Lice like your brotherdon't count, anyway. It's up to you now."

She sat looking at him, wondering what it was that had defeated a man ofthis kind; she knew that it was not James Taggart.

She saw him looking at her, as if he were struggling with a question markof his own. Then he smiled, and she saw, incredulously, that the smile heldsadness and pity.

"You'd better not feel sorry for me," he said. "I think, of the two of us,it's you who have the harder time ahead. And I think you're going to get itworse than I did."

She had telephoned the mills and made an appointment to see Hank Reardenthat afternoon. She had just hung up the receiver and was bending over themaps of the Rio Norte Line spread on her desk, when the door opened. Dagnylooked up, startled; she did not expect the door of her office to openwithout announcement.

The man who entered was a stranger. He was young, tall, and somethingabout him suggested violence, though she could not say what it was, becausethe first trait one grasped about him was a quality of self-control thatseemed almost arrogant. He had dark eyes, disheveled hair, and his clotheswere expensive, but worn as if he did not care or notice what he wore.

"Ellis Wyatt," he said in self-introduction.

She leaped to her feet, involuntarily. She understood why nobody had orcould have stopped him in the outer office."Sit down, Mr. Wyatt," she said, smiling.

"It won't be necessary." He did not smile. "I don't hold longconferences."

Slowly, taking her time by conscious intention, she sat down and leanedback, looking at him."Well?" she asked.

"I came to see you because I understand you're the only one who's got anybrains in this rotten outfit.""What can I do for you?"

"You can listen to an ultimatum." He spoke distinctly, giving an unusualclarity to every syllable. "I expect Taggart Transcontinental, nine monthsfrom now, to run trains in Colorado as my business requires them to be run.If the snide stunt you people perpetrated on the Phoenix-Durango was done forthe purpose of saving yourself from the necessity of effort, this is to giveyou notice that you will not get away with it. I made no demands on you whenyou could not give me the kind of service I needed. I found someone whocould. Now you wish to force me to deal with you. You expect to dictate termsby leaving me no choice. You expect me to hold my business down to the levelof your incompetence. This is to tell you that you have miscalculated."

She said slowly, with effort, "Shall I tell you what I intend to do aboutour service in Colorado?"

"No. I have no interest in discussions and intentions. I expecttransportation. What you do to furnish it and how you do it, is your problem,not mine. I am merely giving you a warning. Those who wish to deal with me,must do so on my terms or not at all. I do not make terms with incompetence.If you expect to earn money by carrying the oil I produce, you must be asgood at your business as I am at mine. I wish this to be understood."

She said quietly, "I understand."

"I shan't waste time proving to you why you'd better take my ultimatumseriously. If you have the intelligence to keep this corrupt organizationfunctioning at all, you have the intelligence to judge this for yourself. Weboth know that if Taggart Transcontinental runs trains in Colorado the way itdid five years ago, it will ruin me. I know that that is what you peopleintend to do. You expect to feed off me while you can and to find anothercarcass to pick dry after you have finished mine. That is the policy of mostof mankind today. So here is my ultimatum: it is now in your power to destroyme; I may have to go; but if I go, I'll make sure that I take all the rest ofyou along with me."

Somewhere within her, under the numbness that held her still to receivethe lashing, she felt a small point of pain, hot like the pain of scalding.She wanted to tell him of the years she had spent looking for men such as heto work with; she wanted to tell him that his enemies were hers, that she wasfighting the same battle; she wanted to cry to him: I'm not one of them! Butshe knew that she could not do it. She bore the responsibility for TaggartTranscontinental and for everything done in its name; she had no right tojustify herself now.

Sitting straight, her glance as steady and open as his, she answeredevenly, "You will get the transportation you need, Mr. Wyatt."

She saw a faint hint of astonishment in his face; this was not the manneror the answer he had expected; perhaps it was what she had not said thatastonished him most: that she offered no defense, no excuses. He took amoment to study her silently. Then he said, his voice less sharp: "All right.Thank you. Good day."

She inclined her head. He bowed and left the office.

"That's the story, Hank. I had worked out an almost impossible schedule tocomplete the Rio Norte Line in twelve months. Now I'll have to do it in nine.You were to give us the rail over a period of one year. Can you give it to uswithin nine months? If there's any human way to do it, do it. If not, I'llhave to find some other means to finish it."

Rearden sat behind his desk. His cold, blue eyes made two horizontal cutsacross the gaunt planes of his face; they remained horizontal, impassivelyhalf-closed; he said evenly, without emphasis: 'I'll do it."

Dagny leaned back in her chair. The short sentence was a shock. It was notmerely relief: it was the sudden realization that nothing else was necessaryto guarantee that it would be done; she needed no proofs, no questions, noexplanations; a complex problem could rest safely on three syllablespronounced by a man who knew what he was saying.

"Don't show that you're relieved." His voice was mocking. "Not tooobviously." His narrowed eyes were watching her with an unrevealing smile. "Imight think that I hold Taggart Transcontinental in my power,"

"You know that, anyway."

"I do. And I intend to make you pay for it.""I expect to. How much?"

"Twenty dollars extra per ton on the balance of the order delivered aftertoday."

"Pretty steep, Hank. Is that the best price you can give me?""No. But that's the one I'm going to get. I could ask twice that and you'dpay it."

"Yes., I would. And you could. But you won't.""Why won't I?"

"Because you need to have the Rio Norte Line built. It's your firstshowcase for Rearden Metal."

He chuckled. "That's right. I like to deal with somebody who has noillusions about getting favors."

"Do you know what made me feel relieved, when you decided to takeadvantage of it?"

"What?"

"That I was dealing, for once, with somebody who doesn't pretend to givefavors."

His smile had a discernible quality now: it was enjoyment. "You alwaysplay it open, don't you?" he asked.

"I've never noticed you doing otherwise."

"I thought I was the only one who could afford to."

"I'm not broke, in that sense, Hank."

"I think I'm going to break you some day—in that sense.""Why?"

"I've always wanted to."

"Don't you have enough cowards around you?"

"That's why I'd enjoy trying it—because you're the only exception.

So you think it's right that I should squeeze every penny of profit I can,out of your emergency?"

"Certainly. I'm not a fool. I don't think you're in business for myconvenience."

"Don't you wish I were?"

"I'm not a moocher, Hank."

"Aren't you going to find it hard to pay?""That's my problem, not yours. I want that rail.""At twenty dollars extra per ton?""Okay, Hank."

"Fine. You'll get the rail. I may get my exorbitant profit—or TaggartTranscontinental may crash before I collect it."

She said, without smiling, "If I don't get that line built in nine monthsTaggart Transcontinental will crash."

"It won't, so long as you run it,"

When he did not smile, his face looked inanimate, only his eyes remainedalive, active with a cold, brilliant clarity of perception. But what he wasmade to feel by the things he perceived, no one would be permitted to know,she thought, perhaps not even himself.

"They've done their best to make it harder for you, haven't they?" hesaid.

"Yes. I was counting on Colorado to save the Taggart system. Now it's upto me to save Colorado. Nine months from now, Dan Conway will close his roadIf mine isn't ready, it won't be any use finishing it.

You can't leave those men without transportation for a single day, letalone a week or a month. At the rate they've been growing, you can't stopthem dead and then expect them to continue. It's like slamming brakes on anengine going two hundred miles an hour."

"I know."

"I can run a good railroad. I can't run it across a continent ofsharecroppers who're not good enough to grow turnips successfully. I've gotto have men like Ellis Wyatt to produce something to fill the trains I run.So I've got to give him a train and a track nine months from now, if I haveto blast all the rest of us into hell to do it!"

He smiled, amused. "You feel very strongly about it, don't you?"

"Don't you?"

He would not answer, but merely held the smile.

"Aren't you concerned about it?" she asked, almost angrily.

"No. "

"Then you don't realize what it means?"

"I realize that I'm going to get the rail rolled and you're going to getthe track laid in nine months."

She smiled, relaxing, wearily and a little guiltily. "Yes. I know we willI know it's useless—getting angry at people like Jim and his friends. Wehaven't any time for it. First, I have to undo what they've done. Thenafterwards"—she stopped, wondering, shook her head and shrugged—"afterwards,they won't matter."

"That's right. They won't. When I heard about that Anti-dog-eat-dogbusiness, it made me sick. But don't worry about the goddamn bastards."

The two words sounded shockingly violent, because his face and voiceremained calm. "You and I will always be there to save the country from theconsequences of their actions." He got up; he said, pacing the office,"Colorado isn't going to be stopped. You'll pull it through. Then Dan Conwaywill be back, and others. All that lunacy is temporary. ]t can't last. It'sdemented, so it has to defeat itself. You and I will just have to work alittle harder for a while, that's all."

She watched his tall figure moving across the office. The office suitedhim; it contained nothing but the few pieces of furniture he needed, all ofthem harshly simplified down to their essential purpose, all of themexorbitantly expensive in the quality of materials and the skill of design.

The room looked like a motor—a motor held within the glass case of broadwindows. But she noticed one astonishing detail: a vase of jade that stood otop of a filing cabinet. The vase was a solid, dark green stone carved into

plain surfaces; the texture of its smooth curves provoked an irresistibledesire to touch it. It seemed startling in that office, incongruous with thesternness of the rest: it was a touch of sensuality.

"Colorado is a great place," he said. "It's going to be the greatest inthe country. You're not sure that I'm concerned about it? That state'sbecoming one of my best customers, as you ought to know if you take time toread the reports on your freight traffic."

"I know. I read them."

"I've been thinking of building a plant there in a few years. To save themyour transportation charges." He glanced at her. "You'll lose an awful lot ofsteel freight, if I do."

"Go ahead. I'll be satisfied with carrying your supplies, and thegroceries for your workers, and the freight of the factories that will followyou there—and perhaps I won't have time to notice that I've lost your steel.. . . What are you laughing at?"

"It's wonderful."

"What?"

"The way you don't react as everybody else does nowadays.""Still, I must admit that for the time being you're the most importantsingle shipper of Taggart Transcontinental.""Don't you suppose I know it?"

"So I can't understand why Jim—" She stopped.

"—tries his best to harm my business? Because your brother Jim is a fool.""He is. But it's more than that. There's something worse than stupidityabout it."

"Don't waste time trying to figure him out. Let him spit. He's no dangerto anyone. People like Jim Taggart just clutter up the world.""I suppose so."

"Incidentally, what would you have done if I'd said I couldn't deliveryour rails sooner?"

"I would have torn up sidings or closed some branch line, any branch line,and I would have used the rail to finish the Rio Norte track on time."

He chuckled. "That's why I'm not worried about Taggart Transcontinental.But you won't have to start getting rail out of old sidings. Not so long asI'm in business."

She thought suddenly that she was wrong about his lack of emotion: thehidden undertone of his manner was enjoyment. She realized that she hadalways felt a sense of light-hearted relaxation in his presence and knownthat he shared it. He was the only man she knew to whom she could speakwithout strain or effort. This, she thought, was a mind she respected, anadversary worth matching. Yet there had always been an odd sense of distancebetween them, the sense of a closed door; there was an impersonal quality inhis manner, something within him that could not be reached.

He had stopped at the window. He stood for a moment, looking out. "Do youknow that the first load of rail is being delivered to you today?" he asked,"Of course I know it."

"Come here."

She approached him. He pointed silently. Far in the distance, beyond themill structures, she saw a string of gondolas waiting on a siding.

The bridge of an overhead crane cut the sky above them. The crane wasmoving. Its huge magnet held a load of rails glued to a disk by the solepower of contact. There was no trace of sun in the gray spread of clouds, yetthe rails glistened, as if the metal caught light out of space. The metal wasa greenish-blue. The great chain stopped over a car, descended, jerked in abrief spasm and left the rails in the car. The crane moved back in majesticindifference; it looked like the giant drawing of a geometrical theoremmoving above the men and the earth.

They stood at the window, watching silently, intently. She did not speak,until another load of green-blue metal came moving across the sky. Then thefirst words she said were not about rail, track or an order completed ontime. She said, as if greeting a new phenomenon of nature: "Rearden Metal . .

He noticed that, but said nothing. He glanced at her, then turned back tothe window.

"Hank, this is great.""Yes."

He said it simply, openly. There was no flattered pleasure in his voice,and no modesty. This, she knew, was a tribute to her, the rarest one personcould pay another: the tribute of feeling free to acknowledge one's owngreatness, knowing that it is understood.

She said, "When I think of what that metal can do, what it will makepossible . . . Hank, this is the most important thing happening in the worldtoday, and none of them know it."

"We know it."

They did not look at each other. They stood watching the crane. On thefront of the locomotive in the distance, she could distinguish the lettersTT. She could distinguish the rails of the busiest industrial siding of theTaggart system.

"As soon as I can find a plant able to do it," she said, "I'm going toorder Diesels made of Rearden Metal."

"You'll need them. How fast do you run your trains on the Rio Nortetrack?"

"Now? We're lucky if we manage to make twenty miles an hour."

He pointed at the cars. "When that rail is laid, you'll be able to runtrains at two hundred and fifty, if you wish."

"I will, in a few years, when we'll have cars of Rearden Metal, which willbe half the weight of steel and twice as safe."

"You'll have to look out for the air lines. We're working on a plane ofRearden Metal. It will weigh practically nothing and lift anything.

You'll see the day of long-haul, heavy-freight air traffic."

"I've been thinking of what that metal will do for motors, any motors, andwhat sort of thing one can design now."

"Have you thought of what it will do for chicken wire? Just plain chicken-wire fences, made of Rearden Metal, that will cost a few pennies a mile andlast two hundred years. And kitchenware that will be bought at the dime storeand passed on from generation to generation. And ocean liners that one won'tbe able to dent with a torpedo."

"Did I tell you that I'm having tests made of communications wire ofRearden Metal?"

"I'm making so many tests that I'll never get through showing people whatcan be done with it and how to do it."

They spoke of the metal and of the possibilities which they could notexhaust. It was as if they were standing on a mountain top, seeing alimitless plain below and roads open in all directions. But they merely spokeof mathematical figures, of weights, pressures, resistances, costs.

She had forgotten her brother and his National Alliance. She had forgottenevery problem, person and event behind her; they had always been clouded inher sight, to be hurried past, to be brushed aside, never final, never quitereal. This was reality, she thought, this sense of clear outlines, ofpurpose, of lightness, of hope. This was the way she had expected to live—shehad wanted to spend no hour and take no action that would mean less thanthis.

She looked at him in the exact moment when he turned to look at her. Theystood very close to each other. She saw, in his eyes, that he felt as she

did. If joy is the aim and the core of existence, she thought, and if thatwhich has the power to give one joy is always guarded as one's deepestsecret, then they had seen each other naked in that moment.

He made a step back and said in a strange tone of dispassionate wonder,"We're a couple of blackguards, aren't we?"

"Why?"

"We haven't any spiritual goals or qualities. All we're after is materialthings. That's all we care for,"

She looked at him, unable to understand. But he was looking past her,straight ahead, at the crane in the distance. She wished he had not said it.The accusation did not trouble her, she never thought of herself in suchterms and she was completely incapable of experiencing a feeling offundamental guilt. But she felt a vague apprehension which she could notdefine, the suggestion that there was something of grave consequence inwhatever had made him say it, something dangerous to him. He had not said itcasually. But there had been no feeling in his voice, neither plea nor shame.He had said it indifferently, as a statement of fact.

Then, as she watched him, the apprehension vanished. He was looking at hismills beyond the window; there was no guilt in his face, no doubt, nothingbut the calm of an inviolate self-confidence.

"Dagny" he said, "whatever we are, it's we who move the world and it's wewho'll pull it through."

CHAPTER VTHE CLIMAX OF THE D'ANCONIAS

The newspaper was the first thing she noticed. It was clutched tightly inEddie's hand, as he entered her office. She glanced up at his face: it wastense and bewildered.

"Dagny, are you very busy?"

"Why?"

"I know that you don't like to talk about him. But there's something hereI think you ought to see."

She extended her hand silently for the newspaper.

The story on the front page announced that upon taking over the SanSebastian Mines, the government of the People's State of Mexico haddiscovered that they were worthless—blatantly, totally, hopelessly worthless.There was nothing to justify the five years of work and the millions spent;nothing but empty excavations, laboriously cut. The few traces of copper werenot worth the effort of extracting them. No great deposits of metal existedor could be expected to exist there, and there were no indications that couldhave permitted anyone to be deluded. The government of the People's State ofMexico was holding emergency sessions about their discovery, in an uproar ofindignation; they felt that they had been cheated.

Watching her, Eddie knew that Dagny sat looking at the newspaper longafter she had finished reading. He knew that he had been right to feel a hintof fear, even though he could not tell what frightened him about that story.

He waited. She raised her head. She did not look at him. Her eyes werefixed, intent in concentration, as if trying to discern something at a greatdistance.

He said, his voice low, "Francisco is not a fool. Whatever else he may be,no matter what depravity he's sunk to—and I've given up trying to figure outwhy—he is not a fool. He couldn't have made a mistake of this kind. It is notpossible. I don't understand it."

"I'm beginning to."

She sat up, jolted upright by a sudden movement that ran through her bodylike a shudder. She said: "Phone him at the Wayne-Falkland and tell thebastard that I want to see him."

"Dagny," he said sadly, reproachfully, "it's Frisco d'Anconia."

"It was."

She walked through the early twilight of the city streets to the Wayne-Falkland Hotel. "He says, any time you wish," Eddie had told her. The firstlights appeared in a few windows high under the clouds.

The skyscrapers looked like abandoned lighthouses sending feeble, dyingsignals out into an empty sea where no ships moved any longer.

A few snowflakes came down, past the dark windows of empty stores, to meltin the mud of the sidewalks. A string of red lanterns cut the street, goingoff into the murky distance.

She wondered why she felt that she wanted to run, that she should berunning; no, not down this street; down a green hillside in the blazing sunto the road on the edge of the Hudson, at the foot of the Taggart estate.That was the way she always ran when Eddie yelled, "It's Frisco d'Anconia!"and they both flew down the hill to the car approaching on the road below.

He was the only guest whose arrival was an event in their childhood, theirbiggest event. The running to meet him had become part of a contest among thethree of them. There was a birch tree on the hillside, halfway between theroad and the house; Dagny and Eddie tried to get past the tree, beforeFrancisco could race up the hill to meet them. On all the many days of hisarrivals, in all the many summers, they never reached the birch tree;

Francisco reached it first and stopped them when he was way past it.Francisco always won, as he always won everything.

His parents were old friends of the Taggart family. He was an only son andhe was being brought up all over the world; his father, it was said, wanted'him to consider the world as his future domain.

Dagny and Eddie could never be certain of where he would spend his winter;but once a year, every summer, a stern South American tutor brought him for amonth to the Taggart estate.

Francisco found it natural that the Taggart children should be chosen ashis companions: they were the crown heirs of Taggart Transcontinental, as hewas of d'Anconia Copper. "We are the only aristocracy left in the world—thearistocracy of money," he said to Dagny once, when he was fourteen. "It's theonly real aristocracy, if people understood what it means, which they don't."

He had a caste system of his own: to him, the Taggart children were notJim and Dagny, but Dagny and Eddie. He seldom volunteered to notice Jim'sexistence. Eddie asked him once, "Francisco, you're some kind of very highnobility, aren't you?" He answered, "Not yet.

The reason my family has lasted for such a long lime is that none of ushas ever been permitted to think he is born a d'Anconia. We are expected tobecome one." He pronounced his name as if he wished his listeners to bestruck in the face and knighted by the sound of it.

Sebastian d'Anconia, his ancestor, had left Spain many centuries ago, at atime when Spain was the most powerful country on earth and his was one ofSpain's proudest figures. He left, because the lord of the Inquisition didnot approve of his manner of thinking and suggested, at a court banquet, thathe change it. Sebastian d'Anconia threw the contents of his wine glass at theface of the lord of the Inquisition, and escaped before he could be seized.He left behind him his fortune, his estate, his marble palace and the girl heloved—and he sailed to a new world.

His first estate in Argentina was a wooden shack in the foothills of theAndes. The sun blazed like a beacon on the silver coat-of-arms of thed'Anconias, nailed over the door of the shack, while Sebastian d'Anconia dugfor the copper of his first mine. He spent years, pickax in hand, breakingrock from sunrise till darkness, with the help of a few stray derelicts:deserters from the armies of his countrymen, escaped convicts, starvingIndians.

Fifteen years after he left Spain, Sebastian d'Anconia sent for the girlhe loved; she had waited for him. When she arrived, she found the silvercoat-of-arms above the entrance of a marble palace, the gardens of a greatestate, and mountains slashed by pits of red ore in the distance. He carriedher in his arms across the threshold of his home. He looked younger than whenshe had seen him last.

"My ancestor and yours," Francisco told Dagny, "would have liked eachother."

Through the years of her childhood, Dagny lived in the future—in the worldshe expected to find, where she would not have to feel contempt or boredom.But for one month each year, she was free. For one month, she could live inthe present. When she raced down the hill to meet Francisco d'Anconia, it wasa release from prison.

"Hi, Slug!"

"Hi, Frisco!"

They had both resented the nicknames, at first. She had asked him angrily,"What do you think you mean?" He had answered, "In case you don't know it,'Slug' means a great fire in a locomotive firebox."

"Where did you pick that up?" "From the gentlemen along the Taggart iron."He spoke five languages, and he spoke English without a trace of accent, aprecise, cultured English deliberately mixed with slang. She had retaliated

by calling him Frisco. He had laughed, amused and annoyed. "If you barbarianshad to degrade the name of a great city of yours, you could at least refrainfrom doing it to me." But they had grown to like the nicknames.

It had started in the days of their second summer together, when he wastwelve years old and she was ten. That summer, Francisco began vanishingevery morning for some purpose nobody could discover. He went off on hisbicycle before dawn, and returned in time to appear at the white and crystaltable set for lunch on the terrace, his manner courteously punctual and alittle too innocent. He laughed, refusing to answer, when Dagny and Eddiequestioned him. They tried to follow him once, through the cold, pre-morningdarkness, but they gave it up; no one could track him when he did not want tobe tracked.

After a while, Mrs. Taggart began, to worry and decided to investigate.She never learned how he had managed to by-pass all the child-labor laws, butshe found Francisco working—by an unofficial deal with the dispatcher—as acall boy for Taggart Transcontinental, at a division point ten miles away.The dispatcher was stupefied by her personal visit; he had no idea that hiscall boy was a house guest of the Taggarts. The boy was known to the localrailroad crews as Frankie, and Mrs. Taggart preferred not to enlighten themabout his full name.

She merely explained that he was working without his parents' permissionand had to quit at once. The dispatcher was sorry to lose him; Frankie, hesaid, was the best call boy they had ever had. "I'd sure like to keep him on.Maybe we could make a deal with his parents?" he suggested. "I'm afraid not."said Mrs. Taggart faintly.

"Francisco," she asked, when she brought him home, "what would your fathersay about this, if he knew?"

"My father would ask whether I was good at the job or not.

That's all he'd want to know."

"Come now, I'm serious."

Francisco was looking at her politely, his courteous manner suggestingcenturies of breeding and drawing rooms; but something in his eyes made herfeel uncertain about the politeness. "Last winter," he answered, "I shippedout as cabin boy on a cargo steamer that carried d'Anconia copper. My fatherlooked for me for three months, but that's all he asked me when I came back."

"So that's how you spend your winters?" said Jim Taggart. Jim's smile hada touch of triumph, the triumph of finding cause to feel contempt.

"That was last winter," Francisco answered pleasantly, with no change inthe innocent, casual tone of his voice. "The winter before last I spent inMadrid, at the home of the Duke of Alba."

"Why did you want to work on a railroad?" asked Dagny.

They stood looking at each other: hers was a glance of admiration, his ofmockery; but it was not the mockery of malice—it was the laughter of asalute.

"To learn what it's like, Slug," he answered, "and to tell you that I'vehad a job with Taggart Transcontinental before you did."

Dagny and Eddie spent their winters trying to master some new skill, inorder to astonish Francisco and beat him, for once. They never succeeded.When they showed him how to hit a ball with a bat, a game he had never playedbefore, he watched them for a few minutes, then said, "I think I get theidea. Let me try." He took the bat and sent the ball flying over a line ofoak trees far at the end of the field.

When Jim was given a motorboat for his birthday, they all stood on theriver landing, watching the lesson, while an instructor showed Jim how to runit. None of them had ever driven a motorboat before. The sparkling whitecraft, shaped like a bullet, kept staggering clumsily across the water, itswake a long record of shivering, its motor choking with hiccoughs, while the

instructor, seated beside him, kept seizing the wheel out of Jim's hands. Forno apparent reason, Jim raised his head suddenly and yelled at Francisco, "Doyou think you can do it any better?" "I can do it." "Try it!"

When the boat came back and its two occupants stepped out, Franciscoslipped behind the wheel. "Wait a moment," he said to the instructor, whoremained on the landing. "Let me take a look at this."

Then, before the instructor had time to move, the boat shot out to themiddle of the river, as if fired from a gun. It was streaking away beforethey grasped what they were seeing. As it went shrinking into the distanceand sunlight, Dagny's picture of it was three straight lines: its wake, thelong shriek of its motor, and the aim of the driver at its wheel.

She noticed the strange expression of her father's face as he looked atthe vanishing speedboat. He said nothing; he just stood looking. Sheremembered that she had seen him look that way once before. It was when heinspected a complex system of pulleys which Francisco, aged twelve, haderected to make an elevator to the top of a rock; he was teaching Dagny andEddie to dive from the rock into the Hudson. Francisco's notes of calculationwere still scattered about on the ground; her father picked them up, lookedat them, then asked, "Francisco, how many years of algebra have you had?""Two years." "Who taught you to do this?" "Oh, that's just something Ifigured out." She did not know that what her father held on the crumpledsheets of paper was the crude version of a differential equation.

The heirs of Sebastian d'Anconia had been an unbroken line of first sons,who knew how to bear his name. It was a tradition of the family that the manto disgrace them would be the heir who died, leaving the d'Anconia fortune nogreater than he had received it. Throughout the generations, that disgracehad not come. An Argentinian legend said that the hand of a d'Anconia had themiraculous power of the saints-only it was not the power to heal, but the power to produce.

The d'Anconia heirs had been men of unusual ability, but none of themcould match what Francisco d'Anconia promised to become. It was as if thecenturies had sifted the family's qualities through a fine mesh, haddiscarded the irrelevant, the inconsequential, the weak, and had let nothingthrough except pure talent; as if chance, for once, had achieved an entitydevoid of the accidental.

Francisco could do anything he undertook, he could do it better thananyone else, and he did it without effort. There was no boasting in hismanner and consciousness, no thought of comparison. His attitude was not: "Ican do it better than you," but simply: "I can do it." What he meant by doingwas doing superlatively.

No matter what discipline was required of him by his father's exactingplan for his education, no matter what subject he was ordered to study,Francisco mastered it with effortless amusement. His father adored him, butconcealed it carefully, as he concealed the pride of knowing that he wasbringing up the most brilliant phenomenon of a brilliant family line.

Francisco, it was said, was to be the climax of the d'Anconias.

"I don't know what sort of motto the d'Anconias have on their familycrest," Mrs. Taggart said once, "but I'm sure that Francisco will change itto 'What for?' " It was the first question he asked about any activityproposed to him—and nothing would make him act, if he found no valid answer.He flew through the days of his summer month like a rocket, but if onestopped him in mid-flight, he could always name the purpose of his everyrandom moment. Two things were impossible to him: to stand still or to moveaimlessly.

"Let's find out" was the motive he gave to Dagny and Eddie for anything heundertook, or "Let's make it." These were his only forms of enjoyment.

"I can do it," he said, when he was building his elevator, clinging to theside of a cliff, driving metal wedges into rock, his arms moving with anexpert's rhythm, drops of blood slipping, unnoticed, from under a bandage onhis wrist. "No, we can't take turns, Eddie, you're not big enough yet tohandle a hammer. Just cart the weeds off and keep the way clear for me, I'lldo the rest. . . . What blood? Oh, that's nothing, just a cut I gotyesterday. Dagny, run to the house and bring me a clean bandage."

Jim watched them. They left him alone, but they often saw him standing inthe distance, watching Francisco with a peculiar kind of intensity.

He seldom spoke in Francisco's presence. But he would corner Dagny and hewould smile derisively, saying, "AH those airs you put on, pretending thatyou're an iron woman with a mind of her own! You're a spineless dishrag,that's all you are. It's disgusting, the way you let that conceited punkorder you about. He can twist you around his little finger. You haven't anypride at all. The way you run when he whistles and wait on him! Why don't youshine his shoes?" "Because he hasn't told me to," she answered.

Francisco could win any game in any local contest. He never enteredcontests. He could have ruled the junior country club. He never came withinsight of their clubhouse, ignoring their eager attempts to enroll the mostfamous heir in the world. Dagny and Eddie were his only friends. They couldnot tell whether they owned him or were owned by him completely; it made nodifference: either concept made them happy.

The three of them set out every morning on adventures of their own kind.Once, an elderly professor of literature, Mrs. Taggart's friend, saw them ontop of a pile in a junk yard, dismantling the carcass of an automobile. Hestopped, shook his head and said to Francisco, "A young man of your positionought to spend his time in libraries, absorbing the culture of the world.""What do you think I'm doing?" asked Francisco.

There were no factories in the neighborhood, but Francisco taught Dagnyand Eddie to steal rides on Taggart trains to distant towns, where theyclimbed fences into mill yards or hung on window sills, watching machinery asother children watched movies. "When I run Taggart Transcontinental . . ."Dagny would say at times. "When I run d'Anconia Copper . . ." said Francisco.They never had to explain the rest to each other; they knew each other's goaland motive.

Railroad conductors caught them, once in a while. Then a stationmaster ahundred miles away would telephone Mrs. Taggart: "We've got three youngtramps here who say that they are—" "Yes," Mrs. Taggart would sigh, "theyare. Please send them back."

"Francisco, " Eddie asked him once, as they stood by the tracks of theTaggart station, "you've been just about everywhere in the world.

What's the most important thing on earth?" "This," answered Francisco,pointing to the emblem TT on the front of an engine. He added, "I wish Icould have met Nat Taggart."

He noticed Dagny's glance at him. He said nothing else. But minutes later,when they went on through the woods, down a narrow path of damp earth, fernsand sunlight, he said, "Dagny, I'll always bow to a coat-of-arms. I'll alwaysworship the symbols of nobility. Am I not supposed to be an aristocrat? OnlyI don't give a damn for moth-eaten turrets and tenth-hand unicorns. Thecoats-of-arms of our day are to be found on billboards and in the ads ofpopular magazines." "What do you mean?" asked Eddie. "Industrial trademarks,Eddie," he answered.

Francisco was fifteen years old, that summer.

"When I run d'Anconia Copper . . ." "I'm studying mining and mineralogy,because I must be ready for the time when I run d'Anconia Copper. . . ." "I'mstudying electrical engineering, because power companies are the best

customers of d'Anconia Copper. . . ." "I'm going to study philosophy, becauseI'll need it to protect d'Anconia Copper. . . ."

"Don't you ever think of anything but d'Anconia Copper?" Jim asked himonce.

"No. "

"It seems to me that there are other things in the world.""Let others think about them.""Isn't that a very selfish attitude?""It is."

"What are you after?""Money."

"Don't you have enough?"

"In his lifetime, every one of my ancestors raised the production ofd'Anconia Copper by about ten per cent. I intend to raise it by one hundred.""What for?" Jim asked, in sarcastic imitation of Francisco's voice."When I die, I hope to go to heaven—whatever the hell that is—and I want to be able to afford the price of admission.""Virtue is the price of admission," Jim said haughtily.

"That's what I mean, James. So I want to be prepared to claim the greatestvirtue of all—that I was a man who made money.""Any grafter can make money."

"James, you ought to discover some day that words have an exact meaning."

Francisco smiled; it was a smile of radiant mockery. Watching them, Dagnythought suddenly of the difference between Francisco and her brother Jim.Both of them smiled derisively. But Francisco seemed to laugh at thingsbecause he saw something much greater. Jim laughed as if he wanted to letnothing remain great.

She noticed the particular quality of Francisco's smile again, one night,when she sat with him and Eddie at a bonfire they had built in the woods. Theglow of the fire enclosed them within a fence of broken, moving strips thatheld pieces of tree trunks, branches and distant stars.

She felt as if there were nothing beyond that fence, nothing but blackemptiness, with the hint of some breath-stopping, frightening promise . . .like the future. But the future, she thought, would be like Francisco'ssmile, there was the key to it, the advance warning of its nature —in hisface in the firelight under the pine branches—and suddenly she felt anunbearable happiness, unbearable because it was too full and she had no wayto express it. She glanced at Eddie. He was looking at Francisco. In somequiet way of his own, Eddie felt as she did.

"Why do you like Francisco?" she asked him weeks later, when Francisco wasgone.

Eddie looked astonished; it had never occurred to him that the feelingcould be questioned. He said, "He makes me feel safe."She said, "He makes me expect excitement and danger."

Francisco was sixteen, next summer, the day when she stood alone with himon the summit of a cliff by the river, their shorts and shirts torn in theirclimb to the top. They stood looking down the Hudson; they had heard that onclear days one could see New York in the distance. But they saw only a hazemade of three different kinds of light merging together: the river, the skyand the sun.

She knelt on a rock, leaning forward, trying to catch some hint of thecity, the wind blowing her hair across her eyes. She glanced back over hershoulder—and saw that Francisco was not looking at the distance: he stoodlooking at her. It was an odd glance, intent and unsmiling. She remainedstill for a moment, her hands spread flat on the rock, her arms tensed tosupport the weight of her body; inexplicably, his glance made her aware ofher pose, of her shoulder showing through the torn shirt, of her long,

scratched, sunburned legs slanting from the rock to the ground. She stood upangrily and backed away from him. And while throwing her head up, resentmentin her eyes to meet the sternness in his, while feeling certain that his wasa glance of condemnation and hostility, she heard herself asking him, a toneof smiling defiance in her voice: "What do you like about me?"

He laughed; she wondered, aghast, what had made her say it. He answered,"There's what I like about you," pointing to the glittering rails of theTaggart station in the distance.

"It's not mine," she said, disappointed.

"What I like is that it's going to be."

She smiled, conceding his victory by being openly delighted. She did notknow why he had looked at her so strangely; but she felt that he had seensome connection, which she could not grasp, between her body and somethingwithin her that would give her the strength to rule those rails some day.

He said brusquely, "Let's see if we can see New York," and jerked her bythe arm to the edge of the cliff. She thought that he did not notice that hetwisted her arm in a peculiar way, holding it down along the length of hisside; it made her stand pressed against him, and she felt the warmth of thesun in the skin of his legs against hers. They looked far out into thedistance, but they saw nothing ahead except a haze of light.

When Francisco left, that summer, she thought that his departure was; likethe crossing of a frontier which ended his childhood: he was to startcollege, that fall. Her turn would come next. She felt an eager impatiencetouched by the excitement of fear, as if he had leaped into an unknowndanger. It was like the moment, years ago, when she had seen him dive firstfrom a rock into the Hudson, had seen him vanish under the black water andhad stood, knowing that he would reappear in an instant and that it wouldthen be her turn to follow.

She dismissed the fear; dangers, to Francisco, were merely opportunitiesfor another brilliant performance; there were no battles he could lose, noenemies to beat him. And then she thought of a remark she had heard a fewyears earlier. It was a strange remark—and it was strange that the words hadremained in her mind, even though she had thought them senseless at the time.The man who said it was an old professor of mathematics, a friend of herfather, who came to their country house for just that one visit. She likedhis face, and she could still see the peculiar sadness in his eyes when hesaid to her father one evening, sitting on the terrace in the fading light,pointing to Francisco's figure in the garden, "That boy is vulnerable. He hastoo great a capacity for joy.

What will he do with it in a world where there's so little occasion forit?"

Francisco went to a great American school, which his father had chosen forhim long ago. It was the most distinguished institution of learning left inthe world, the Patrick Henry University of Cleveland.

He did not come to visit her in New York, that winter, even though he wasonly a night's journey away. They did not write to each other, they had neverdone it. But she knew that he would come back to the country for one summermonth.

There were a few times, that winter, when she felt an undefinedapprehension: the professor's words kept returning to her mind, as a warningwhich she could not explain. She dismissed them. When she thought ofFrancisco, she felt the steadying assurance that she would have another monthas an advance against the future, as a proof that the world she saw ahead wasreal, even though it was not the world of those around her.

"Hi, Slug!"

"Hi, Frisco!"

Standing on the hillside, in the first moment of seeing him again, shegrasped suddenly the nature of that world which they, together, held againstall others. It was only an instant's pause, she felt her cotton skirt beatingin the wind against her knees, felt the sun on her eyelids, and the upwardthrust of such an immense relief that she ground her feet into the grassunder her sandals, because she thought she would rise, weightless, throughthe wind.

It was a sudden sense of freedom and safety—because she realized that sheknew nothing about the events of his life, had never known and would neverneed to know. The world of chance—of families, meals, schools, people, ofaimless people dragging the load of some unknown guilt—was not theirs, couldnot change him, could not matter. He and she had never spoken of the thingsthat happened to them, but only of what they thought and of what they woulddo. . . . She looked at him silently, as if a voice within her were saying:Not the things that are, but the things we'll make ... We are not to bestopped, you and I . . .

Forgive me the fear, if I thought I could lose you to them—forgive me thedoubt, they'll never reach you—I'll never be afraid for you again. . . .

He, too, stood looking at her for a moment—and it seemed to her that itwas not a look of greeting after an absence, but the look of someone who hadthought of her every day of that year. She could not be certain, it was onlyan instant, so brief that just as she caught it, he was turning to point atthe birch tree behind him and saying in the tone of their childhood game: "Iwish you'd learn to run faster. I'll always have to wait for you."

"Will you wait for me?" she asked gaily.

He answered, without smiling, "Always."

As they went up the hill to the house, he spoke to Eddie, while she walkedsilently by his side. She felt that there was a new reticence between themwhich, strangely, was a new kind of intimacy.

She did not question him about the university. Days later, she asked himonly whether he liked it.

"They're teaching a lot of drivel nowadays," he answered, "but there are afew courses I like."

"Have you made any friends there?"

"Two. "

He told her nothing else.

Jim was approaching his senior year in a college in New York. His studieshad given him a manner of odd, quavering belligerence, as if he had found anew weapon. He addressed Francisco once, without provocation, stopping him inthe middle of the lawn to say in a tone of aggressive self-righteousness: "Ithink that now that you've reached college age, you ought to learn somethingabout ideals. It's time to forget your selfish greed and give some thought toyour social responsibilities, because I think that all those millions you'regoing to inherit are not for your personal pleasure, they are a trust for thebenefit of the underprivileged and the poor, because I think that the personwho doesn't realize this is the most depraved type of human being."

Francisco answered courteously, "It is not advisable, lames, to ventureunsolicited opinions. You should spare yourself the embarrassing discovery oftheir exact value to your listener."

Dagny asked him, as they walked away, "Are there many men like Jim in theworld?"

Francisco laughed. "A great many.""Don't you mind it?"

"No. I don't have to deal with them. Why do you ask that?"

"Because I think they're dangerous in some way ... I don't know how . .

"Good God, Dagny! Do you expect me to be afraid of an object like James?"

It was days later, when they were alone, walking through the woods on theshore of the river, that she asked: "Francisco, what's the most depraved typeof human being?"

"The man without a purpose."

She was looking at the straight shafts of the trees that stood against thegreat, sudden, shining spread of space beyond. The forest was dim and cool,but the outer branches caught the hot, silver sunrays from the water. Shewondered why she enjoyed the sight, when she had never taken any notice ofthe country around her, why she was so aware of her enjoyment, of hermovements, of her body in the process of walking.

She did not want to look at Francisco. She felt that his presence seemedmore intensely real when she kept her eyes away from him, almost as if thestressed awareness of herself came from him, like the sunlight from thewater.

"You think you're good, don't you?" he asked.

"I always did," she answered defiantly, without turning.

"Well, let me sec you prove it. Let me see how far you'll rise withTaggart Transcontinental. No matter how good you are, I'll expect you towring everything you've got, trying to be still better. And when you've wornyourself out to reach a goal, I'll expect you to start for another."

"Why do you think that I care to prove anything to you?" she asked.

"Want me to answer?"

"No," she whispered, her eyes fixed upon the other shore of the river inthe distance.

She heard him chuckling, and after a while he said, "Dagny, there'snothing of any importance in life—except how well you do your work.

Nothing. Only that. Whatever else you are, will come from that. It's theonly measure of human value. All the codes of ethics they'll try to ram downyour throat are just so much paper money put out by swindlers to fleecepeople of their virtues. The code of competence is the only system ofmorality that's on a gold standard. When you grow up, you'll know what Imean."

"I know it now. But . . . Francisco, why are you and I the only ones whoseem to know it?"

"Why should you care about the others?"

"Because I like to understand things, and there's something about peoplethat I can't understand.""What?"

"Well, I've always been unpopular in school and it didn't bother me, butnow I've discovered the reason. It's an impossible kind of reason.

They dislike me, not because I do things badly, but because I do themwell. They dislike me because I've always had the best grades in the class. Idon't even have to study. I always get A's. Do you suppose I should try toget D's for a change and become the most popular girl in school?"

Francisco stopped, looked at her and slapped her face.

What she felt was contained in a single instant, while the ground rockedunder her feet, in a single blast of emotion within her. She knew that shewould have killed any other person who struck her; she felt the violent furywhich would have given her the strength for it—and as violent a pleasure thatFrancisco had done it. She felt pleasure from the dull, hot pain in her cheekand from the taste of blood in the corner of her mouth. She felt pleasure inwhat she suddenly grasped about him, about herself and about his motive.

She braced her feet to stop the dizziness, she held her head straight andstood facing him in the consciousness of a new power, feeling herself hisequal for the first time, looking at him with a mocking smile of triumph.

"Did I hurt you as much as that?" she asked.

He looked astonished; the question and the smile were not those of achild. He answered, "Yes—if it pleases you.""It does."

"Don't ever do that again. Don't crack jokes of that kind.""Don't be a fool. Whatever made you think that I cared about beingpopular?"

"When you grow up, you'll understand what sort of unspeakable thing yousaid."

"I understand it now."

He turned abruptly, took out his handkerchief and dipped it in the waterof the river. "Come here," he ordered.

She laughed, stepping back, "Oh no. I want to keep it as it is. I hope itswells terribly. I like it."

He looked at her for a long moment. He said slowly, very earnestly,"Dagny, you're wonderful."

"I thought that you always thought so," she answered, her voice insolentlycasual.

When she came home, she told her mother that she had cut her lip byfalling against a rock. It was the only lie she ever told. She did not do itto protect Francisco; she did it because she felt, for some reason which shecould not define, that the incident was a secret too precious to share, Nextsummer, when Francisco came, she was sixteen. She started running down thehill to meet him, but stopped abruptly. He saw it, stopped, and they stoodfor a moment, looking at each other across the distance of a long, greenslope. It was he who walked up toward her, walked very slowly, while shestood waiting.

When he approached, she smiled innocently, as if unconscious of anycontest intended or won.

"You might like to know," she said, "that I have a job on the railroad.Night operator at Rockdale."

He laughed. "All right, Taggart Transcontinental, now it's a race.Let's see who'll do greater honor, you—to Nat Taggart, or I—to Sebastiand'Anconia."

That winter, she stripped her life down to the bright simplicity of ageometrical drawing: a few straight lines—to and from the engineering collegein the city each day, to and from her job at Rockdale Station each night—andthe closed circle of her room, a room littered with diagrams of motors,blueprints of steel structures, and railroad timetables.

Mrs. Taggart watched her daughter in unhappy bewilderment. She could haveforgiven all the omissions, but one: Dagny showed no sign of interest in men,no romantic inclination whatever. Mrs. Taggart did not approve of extremes;she had been prepared to contend with an extreme of the opposite kind, ifnecessary; she found herself thinking that this was worse. She feltembarrassed when she had to admit that her daughter, at seventeen, did nothave a single admirer.

"Dagny and Francisco d'Anconia?" she said, smiting ruefully, in answer tothe curiosity of her friends. "Oh no, it's not a romance. It's aninternational industrial cartel of some kind. That's all they seem to careabout."

Mrs. Taggart heard James say one evening, in the presence of guests, apeculiar tone of satisfaction in his voice, "Dagny, even though you werenamed after her, you really look more like Nat Taggart than like that firstDagny Taggart, the famous beauty who was his wife." Mrs. Taggart did not knowwhich offended her most: that James said it or that Dagny accepted it happilyas a compliment.

She would never have a chance, thought Mrs. Taggart, to form someconception of her own daughter. Dagny was only a figure hurrying in and out

of the apartment, a slim figure in a leather jacket, with a raised collar, ashort skirt and long show-girl legs. She walked, cutting across a room, witha masculine, straight-line abruptness, but she had a peculiar grace of motionthat was swift, tense and oddly, challengingly feminine.

At times, catching a glimpse of Dagny's face, Mrs. Taggart caught anexpression which she could not quite define: it was much more than gaiety, itwas the look of such an untouched purity of enjoyment that she found itabnormal, too: no young girl could be so insensitive as to have discovered nosadness in life. Her daughter, she concluded, was incapable of emotion.

"Dagny.," she asked once, "don't you ever want to have a good time?" Dagnylooked at her incredulously and answered, "What do you think I'm having?"

The decision to give her daughter a formal debut cost Mrs. Taggart a greatdeal of anxious thought. She did not know whether she was introducing to NewYork society Miss Dagny Taggart of the Social Register or the night operatorof Rockdale Station; she was inclined to believe it was more truly this last;and she felt certain that Dagny would reject the idea of such an occasion.She was astonished when Dagny accepted it with inexplicable eagerness, foronce like a child.

She was astonished again, when she saw Dagny dressed for the party, It wasthe first feminine dress she had ever worn—a gown of white chiffon with ahuge skirt that floated like a cloud. Mrs. Taggart had expected her to looklike a preposterous contrast. Dagny looked like a beauty. She seemed botholder and more radiantly innocent than usual; standing in front of a mirror,she held her head as Nat Taggart's wife would have held it.

"Dagny," Mrs. Taggart said gently, reproachfully, "do you see howbeautiful you can be when you want to?"

"Yes," said Dagny, without any astonishment.

The ballroom of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel had been decorated under Mrs.Taggart's direction; she had an artist's taste, and the setting of thatevening was her masterpiece. "Dagny, there are things I would like you tolearn to notice," she said, "lights, colors, flowers, music.

They are not as negligible as you might think." "I've never thoughtthey're negligible," Dagny answered happily. For once, Mrs. Taggart felt abond between them; Dagny was looking at her with a child's grateful trust."They're the things that make life beautiful," said Mrs.

Taggart. "I want this evening to be very beautiful for you, Dagny. Thefirst ball is the most romantic event of one's life."

To Mrs. Taggart, the greatest surprise was the moment when she saw Dagnystanding under the lights, looking at the ballroom. This was not a child, nota girl, but a woman of such confident, dangerous power that Mrs. Taggartstared at her with shocked admiration. In an age of casual, cynical,indifferent routine, among people who held themselves as if they were notflesh, but meat—Dagny's bearing seemed almost indecent, because this was theway a woman would have faced a ballroom centuries ago, when the act ofdisplaying one's half-naked body for the admiration of men was an act ofdaring, when it had meaning, and but one meaning, acknowledged by all as ahigh adventure. And this—thought Mrs. Taggart, smiling—was the girl she hadbelieved to be devoid of sexual capacity. She felt an immense relief, and atouch of amusement at the thought that a discovery of this kind should makeher feel relieved.

The relief lasted only for a few hours. At the end of the evening, she sawDagny in a corner of the ballroom, sitting on a balustrade as if it were afence rail, her legs dangling under the chiffon skirt as if she were dressedin slacks. She was talking to a couple of helpless young men, her facecontemptuously empty.

Neither Dagny nor Mrs. Taggart said a word when they rode home together.But hours later, on a sudden impulse, Mrs. Taggart went to her daughter's

room. Dagny stood by the window, still wearing the white evening gown; itlooked like a cloud supporting a body that now seemed too thin for it, asmall body with sagging shoulders. Beyond the window, the clouds were gray inthe first light of morning.

When Dagny turned, Mrs. Taggart saw only puzzled helplessness in her face;the face was calm, but something about it made Mrs. Taggart wish she had notwished that her daughter should discover sadness.

"Mother, do they think it's exactly in reverse?" she asked.

"What?" asked Mrs. Taggart, bewildered.

"The things you were talking about. The lights and the flowers. Do theyexpect those things to make them romantic, not the other way around?""Darling, what do you mean?"

"There wasn't a person there who enjoyed it," she said, her voicelifeless, "or who thought or felt anything at all. They moved about, and theysaid the same dull things they say anywhere. I suppose they thought thelights would make it brilliant."

"Darling, you take everything too seriously. One is not supposed to beintellectual at a ball. One is simply supposed to be gay."

"How? By being stupid?"

"I mean, for instance, didn't you enjoy meeting the young men?"

"What men? There wasn't a man there I couldn't squash ten of."

Days later, sitting at her desk at Rockdale Station, feelinglightheartedly at home, Dagny thought of the party and shrugged incontemptuous reproach at her own disappointment. She looked up: it was springand there were leaves on the tree branches in the darkness outside; the airwas still and warm. She asked herself what she had expected from that party.She did not know. But she felt it again, here, now, as she sat slouched overa battered desk, looking out into the darkness: a sense of expectationwithout object, rising through her body, slowly, like a warm liquid. Sheslumped forward across the desk, lazily, feeling neither exhaustion nordesire to work.

When Francisco came, that summer, she told him about the party and abouther disappointment. He listened silently, looking at her for the first timewith that glance of unmoving mockery which he reserved for others, a glancethat seemed to see too much. She felt as if he heard, in her words, more thanshe knew she told him.

She saw the same glance in his eyes on the evening when she left him tooearly. They were alone, sitting on the shore of the river.

She had another hour before she was due at Rockdale. There were long, thinstrips of fire in the sky, and red sparks floating lazily on the water. Hehad been silent for a long time, when she rose abruptly and told him that shehad to go. He did not try to stop her; he leaned back, his elbows in thegrass, and looked at her without moving; his glance seemed to say that heknew her motive. Hurrying angrily up the slope to the house, she wonderedwhat had made her leave; she did not know; it had been a sudden restlessnessthat came from a feeling she did not identify till now: a feeling ofexpectation.

Each night, she drove the five miles from the country house to Rockdale.She came back at dawn, slept a few hours and got up with the rest of thehousehold. She felt no desire to sleep. Undressing for bed in the first raysof the sun, she felt a tense, joyous, causeless impatience to face the daythat was starting.

She saw Francisco's mocking glance again, across the net of a tenniscourt. She did not remember the beginning of that game; they had often playedtennis together and he had always won. She did not know at what moment shedecided that she would win, this time.

When she became aware of it, it was no longer a decision or a wish, but aquiet fury rising within her. She did not know why she had to win; she didnot know why it seemed so crucially, urgently necessary; she knew only thatshe had to and that she would.

It seemed easy to play; it was as if her will had vanished and someone'spower were playing for her. She watched Francisco's figure —a tall, swiftfigure, the suntan of his arms stressed by his short white shirt sleeves. Shefelt an arrogant pleasure in seeing the skill of his movements, because thiswas the thing which she would beat, so that his every expert gesture becameher victory, and the brilliant competence of his body became the triumph ofhers.

She felt the rising pain of exhaustion—not knowing that it was pain,feeling it only in sudden stabs that made her aware of some part of her bodyfor an instant, to be forgotten in the next: her arm socket—

her shoulder blades—her hips, with the white shorts sticking to her skin —the muscles of her legs, when she leaped to meet the ball, but did notremember whether she came down to touch the ground again—her eyelids, whenthe sky went dark red and the ball came at her through the darkness like awhirling white flame—the thin, hot wire that shot from her ankle, up herback, and went on shooting straight across the air, driving the ball atFrancisco's figure. . . . She felt an exultant pleasure—because every stab ofpain begun in her body had to end in his, because he was being exhausted asshe was—what she did to herself, she was doing it also to him—this was whathe felt—this was what she drove him to—it was not her pain that she felt orher body, but his.

In the moments when she saw his face, she saw that he was laughing.

He was looking at her as if he understood. He was playing, not to win, butto make it harder for her—sending his shots wild to make her run —losingpoints to see her twist her body in an agonizing backhand-standing still, letting her think he would miss, only to let his arm shootout casually at the last moment and send the ball back with such force thatshe knew she would miss it. She felt as if she could not move again, notever—and it was strange to find herself landing suddenly at the other side ofthe court, smashing the ball in time, smashing it as if she wished it toburst to pieces, as if she wished it were Francisco's face.

Just once more, she thought, even if the next one would crack the bones ofher arm . . . Just once more, even if the air which she forced down in gaspspast her tight, swollen throat, would be stopped altogether . . . Then shefelt nothing, no pain, no muscles, only the thought that she had to beat him,to see him exhausted, to see him collapse, and then she would be free to diein the next moment.

She won. Perhaps it was his laughing that made him lose, for once.

He walked to the net, while she stood still, and threw his racket across,at her feet, as if knowing that this was what she wanted. He walked out ofthe court and fell down on the grass of the lawn, collapsing, his head on hisarm.

She approached him slowly. She stood over him, looking down at his bodystretched at her feet, looking at his sweat-drenched shirt and the strands ofhis hair spilled across his arm. He raised his head. His glance moved slowlyup the line of her legs, to her shorts, to her blouse, to her eyes. It was amocking glance that seemed to see straight through her clothes and throughher mind. And it seemed to say that he had won.

She sat at her desk at Rockdale, that night, alone in the old stationbuilding, looking at the sky in the window. It was the hour she liked best,when the top panes of the window grew lighter, and the rails of the trackoutside became threads of blurred silver across the lower panes. She turnedoff her lamp and watched the vast, soundless motion of light over a

motionless earth. Things stood still, not a leaf trembled on the branches,while the sky slowly lost its color and became an expanse that looked like aspread of glowing water.

Her telephone was silent at this hour, almost as if movement had stoppedeverywhere along the system. She heard steps approaching outside, suddenly,close to the door. Francisco came in. He had never come here before, but shewas not astonished to see him.

"What are you doing up at this hour?" she asked.

"I didn't feel like sleeping."

"How did you get here? I didn't hear your car.""I walked."

Moments passed before she realized that she had not asked him why he cameand that she did not want to ask it.

He wandered through the room, looking at the clusters of waybills thathung on the walls, at the calendar with a picture of the Taggart Comet caughtin a proud surge of motion toward the onlooker. He seemed casually at home,as if he felt that the place belonged to them, as they always felt whereverthey went together. But he did not seem to want to talk. He asked a fewquestions about her job, then kept silent.

As the light grew outside, movement grew down on the line and thetelephone started ringing in the silence. She turned to her work. He sat in acorner, one leg thrown over the arm of his chair, waiting.

She worked swiftly, feeling inordinately clear-headed. She found pleasurein the rapid precision of her hands. She concentrated on the sharp, brightsound of the phone, on the figures of train numbers, car numbers, ordernumbers. She was conscious of nothing else.

But when a thin sheet of paper fluttered down to the floor and she bent topick it up, she was suddenly as intently conscious of that particular moment,of herself and her own movement. She noticed her gray linen skirt, the rolledsleeve of her gray blouse and her naked arm reaching down for the paper. Shefelt her heart stop causelessly in the kind of gasp one feels in moments ofanticipation. She picked up the paper and turned back to her desk.

It was almost full daylight. A train went past the station, withoutstopping. In the purity of the morning light, the long line of car roofsmelted into a silver string, and the train seemed suspended above the ground,not quite touching it, going past through the air. The floor of the stationtrembled., and glass rattled in the windows. She watched the train's flightwith a smile of excitement. She glanced at Francisco: he was looking at her,with the same smile.

When the day operator arrived, she turned the station over to him, andthey walked out into the morning air. The sun had not yet risen and the airseemed radiant in its stead. She felt no exhaustion. She felt as if she werejust getting up.

She started toward her car, but Francisco said, "Let's walk home.We'll come for the car later.""All right."

She was not astonished and she did not mind the prospect of walking fivemiles. It seemed natural; natural to the moment's peculiar reality that wassharply clear, but cut off from everything, immediate, but disconnected, likea bright island in a wall of fog, the heightened, unquestioning reality onefeels when one is drunk.

The road led through the woods. They left the highway for an old trailthat went twisting among the trees across miles of untouched country. Therewere no traces of human existence around them. Old ruts, overgrown withgrass, made human presence seem more distant, adding the distance of years tothe distance of miles. A haze of twilight remained over the ground, but inthe breaks between the tree trunks there were leaves that hung in patches of

shining green and seemed to light the forest. The leaves hung still. Theywalked, alone to move through a motionless world. She noticed suddenly thatthey had not said a word for a long time.

They came to a clearing. It was a small hollow at the bottom of a shaftmade of straight rock hillsides. A stream cut across the grass, and treebranches flowed low to the ground, like a curtain of green fluid.

The sound of the water stressed the silence. The distant cut of open skymade the place seem more hidden. Far above, on the crest of a hill, one treecaught the first rays of sunlight.

They stopped and looked at each other. She knew, only when he did it, thatshe had known he would. He seized her, she felt her lips in his mouth, felther arms grasping him in violent answer, and knew for the first time how muchshe had wanted him to do it.

She felt a moment's rebellion and a hint of fear. He held her, pressingthe length of his body against hers with a tense, purposeful insistence, hishand moving over her breasts as if he were learning a proprietor's intimacywith her body, a shocking intimacy that needed no consent from her, nopermission. She tried to pull herself away, but she only leaned back againsthis arms long enough to see his face and his smile, the smile that told hershe had given him permission long ago. She thought that she must escape;instead, it was she who pulled his head down to find his mouth again.

She knew that fear was useless, that he would do what he wished, that thedecision was his, that he left nothing possible to her except the thing shewanted most—to submit. She had no conscious realization of his purpose, hervague knowledge of it was wiped out, she had no power to believe it clearly,in this moment, to believe it about herself, she knew only that she wasafraid—yet what she felt was as if she were crying to him: Don't ask me forit—oh, don't ask me—do it!

She braced her feet for an instant, to resist, but his mouth was pressedto hers and they went down to the ground together, never breaking their lipsapart. She lay still—as the motionless, then the quivering object of an actwhich he did simply, unhesitatingly, as of right, the right of theunendurable pleasure it gave them.

He named what it meant to both of them in the first words he spokeafterwards. He said, "We had to learn it from each other." She looked at hislong figure stretched on the grass beside her, he wore black slacks and ablack shirt, her eyes stopped on the belt pulled tight across his slenderwaistline, and she felt the stab of an emotion that was like a gasp of pride,pride in her ownership of his body. She lay on her back, looking up at thesky, feeling no desire to move or think or know that there was any timebeyond this moment.

When she came home, when she lay in bed, naked because her body had becomean unfamiliar possession, too precious for the touch of a nightgown, becauseit gave her pleasure to feel naked and to feel as if the white sheets of herbed were touched by Francisco's body—when she thought that she would notsleep, because she did not want to rest and lose the most wonderfulexhaustion she had ever known—her last thought was of the times when she hadwanted to express, but found no way to do it, an instant's knowledge of afeeling greater than happiness, the feeling of one's blessing upon the wholeof the earth, the feeling of being in love with the fact that one exists andin this kind of world; she thought that the act she had learned was the wayone expressed it. If this was a thought of the gravest importance, she didnot know it; nothing could be grave in a universe from which the concept ofpain had been wiped out; she was not there to weigh her conclusion; she wasasleep, a faint smile on her face, in a silent, luminous room filled with thelight of morning.

That summer, she met him in the woods, in hidden corners by the river, onthe floor of an abandoned shack, in the cellar of the house.

These were the only times when she learned to feel a sense of beauty—by looking up at old wooden rafters or at the steel plate of an airconditioning machine that whirred tensely, rhythmically above their heads.She wore slacks or cotton summer dresses, yet she was never so feminine aswhen she stood beside him, sagging in his arms, abandoning herself toanything he wished, in open acknowledgment of his power to reduce her tohelplessness by the pleasure he had the power to give her. He taught herevery manner of sensuality he could invent. "Isn't it wonderful that ourbodies can give us so much pleasure?" he said to her once, quite simply. Theywere happy and radiantly innocent. They were both incapable of the conceptionthat joy is sin.

They kept their secret from the knowledge of others, not as a shamefulguilt, but as a thing that was immaculately theirs, beyond anyone's right ofdebate or appraisal. She knew the general doctrine on sex, held by people inone form or another, the doctrine that sex was an ugly weakness of man'slower nature, to be condoned regretfully. She experienced an emotion ofchastity that made her shrink, not from the desires of her body, but from anycontact with the minds who held this doctrine.

That winter, Francisco came to see her in New York, at unpredictableintervals. He would fly down from Cleveland, without warning, twice a week,or he would vanish for months. She would sit on the floor of her room,surrounded by charts and blueprints, she would hear a knock at her door andsnap, "I'm busy!" then hear a mocking voice ask, "Are you?" and leap to herfeet to throw the door open, to find him standing there. They would go to anapartment he had rented in the city, a small apartment in a quietneighborhood. "Francisco," she asked him once, in sudden astonishment, "I'myour mistress, am I not?" He laughed. "That's what you are." She felt thepride a woman is supposed to experience at being granted the title of wife.

In the many months of his absence, she never wondered whether he was trueto her or not; she knew he was. She knew, even though she was too young toknow the reason, that indiscriminate desire and unselective indulgence werepossible only to those who regarded sex and themselves as evil.

She knew little about Francisco's life. It was his last year in college;he seldom spoke of it, and she never questioned him. She suspected that hewas working too hard, because she saw, at times, the unnaturally bright lookof his face, the look of exhilaration that comes from driving one's energybeyond its limit. She laughed at him once, boasting that she was an oldemployee of Taggart Transcontinental, while he had not started to work for aliving. He said, "My father refuses to let me work for d'Anconia Copper untilI graduate." "When did you learn to be obedient?" "I must respect his wishes.He is the owner of d'Anconia Copper. . . . He is not, however, the owner ofall the copper companies in the world." There was a hint of secret amusementin his smile.

She did not learn the story until the next fall, when he had graduated andreturned to New York after a visit to his father in Buenos Aires.

Then he told her that he had taken two courses of education during thelast four years: one at the Patrick Henry University, the other in a copperfoundry on the outskirts of Cleveland. "I like to learn things for myself,"he said. He had started working at the foundry as furnace boy, when he wassixteen—and now, at twenty, he owned it. He acquired his first title ofproperty, with the aid of some inaccuracy about his age, on the day when hereceived his university diploma, and he sent them both to his father.

He showed her a photograph of the foundry. It was a small, grimy place,disreputable with age, battered by years of a losing struggle; above its

entrance gate, like a new flag on the mast of a derelict, hung the sign:d'Anconia Copper.

The public relations man of his father's office in New York had moaned,outraged, "But, Don Francisco, you can't do that! What will the public think?That name on a dump of this kind?" "It's my name,"

Francisco had answered.

When he entered his father's office in Buenos Aires, a large room, severeand modern as a laboratory, with photographs of the properties of d'AnconiaCopper as sole ornament on its walls—photographs of the greatest mines, oredocks and foundries in the world—he saw, in the place of honor, facing hisfather's desk, a photograph of the Cleveland foundry with the new sign aboveits gate.

His father's eyes moved from the photograph to Francisco's face as hestood in front of the desk.

"Isn't it a little too soon?" his father asked.

"I couldn't have stood four years of nothing but lectures."

"Where did you get the money for your first payment on that property?"

"By playing the New York stock market,"

"What? Who taught you to do that?"

"It is not difficult to judge which industrial ventures will succeed andwhich won't."

"Where did you get the money to play with?"

"From the allowance you sent me, sir, and from my wages."

"When did you have time to watch the stock market?"

"While I was writing a thesis on the influence—upon subsequentmetaphysical systems—of Aristotle's theory of the Immovable Mover."

Francisco's stay in New York was brief, that fall. His father was sendinghim to Montana as assistant superintendent of a d'Anconia mine. "Oh well," hesaid to Dagny, smiling, "my father does not think it advisable to let me risetoo fast. I would not ask him to take me on faith. If he wants a factualdemonstration, I shall comply." In the spring, Francisco came back—as head ofthe New York office of d'Anconia Copper.

She did not see him often in the next two years. She never knew where hewas, in what city or on what continent, the day after she had seen him. Healways came to her unexpectedly—and she liked it, because it made him acontinuous presence in her life, like the ray of a hidden light that couldhit her at any moment.

Whenever she saw him in his office, she thought of his hands as she hadseen them on the wheel of a motorboat: he drove his business HI with the samesmooth, dangerous, confidently mastered speed. But one small incidentremained in her mind as a shock: it did not fit him.

She saw him standing at the window of his office, one evening, looking atthe brown winter twilight of the city. He did not move for a long time. Hisface was hard and tight; it had the look of an emotion she had never believedpossible to him: of bitter, helpless anger. He said, "There's something wrongin the world. There's always been. Something no one has ever named orexplained." He would not tell her what it was.

When she saw him again, no trace of that incident remained in his manner.It was spring and they stood together on the roof terrace of a restaurant,the light silk of her evening gown blowing in the wind against his tallfigure in formal black clothes. They looked at the city.

In the dining room behind them, the sounds of the music were a concertetude by Richard Halley; Halley's name was not known to many, but they haddiscovered it and they loved his music. Francisco said, "We don't have tolook for skyscrapers in the distance, do we?

We've reached them." She smiled and said, "I think we're going past them.. . . I'm almost afraid . . . we're on a speeding elevator of some kind.""Sure. Afraid of what? Let it speed. Why should there be a limit?"

He was twenty-three when his father died and he went to Buenos Aires totake over the d'Anconia estate, now his. She did not see him for three years.

He wrote to her, at first, at random intervals. He wrote about d'AnconiaCopper, about the world market, about issues affecting the interests ofTaggart Transcontinental. His letters were brief, written by hand, usually atnight.

She was not unhappy in his absence. She, too, was making her first stepstoward the control of a future kingdom. Among the leaders of industry, herfather's friends, she heard it said that one had better watch the youngd'Anconia heir; if that copper company had been great before, it would sweepthe world now, under what his management promised to become. She smiled,without astonishment. There were moments when she felt a sudden, violentlonging for him, but it was only impatience, not pain. She dismissed it, inthe confident knowledge that they were both working toward a future thatwould bring them everything they wanted, including each other. Then hisletters stopped.

She was twenty-four on that day of spring when the telephone rang on herdesk, in an office of the Taggart Building. "Dagny," said a voice sherecognized at once, "I'm at the Wayne-Falkland. Come to have dinner with metonight. At seven." He said it without greeting, as if they had parted theday before. Because it took her a moment to regain the art of breathing, sherealized for the first time how much that voice meant to her. "All right . .. Francisco," she answered. They needed to say nothing else. She thought,replacing the receiver, that his return was natural and as she had alwaysexpected it to happen, except that she had not expected her sudden need topronounce his name or the stab of happiness she felt while pronouncing it.

When she entered his hotel room, that evening, she stopped short.

He stood in the middle of the room, looking at her—and she saw a smilethat came slowly, involuntarily, as if he had lost the ability to smile andwere astonished that he should regain it. He looked at her incredulously, notquite believing what she was or what he felt. His glance was like a plea,like the cry for help of a man who could never cry. At her entrance, he hadstarted their old salute, he had started to say, "Hi—" but he did not finishit. Instead, after a moment, he said, "You're beautiful, Dagny." He said itas if it hurt him.

"Francisco, I—"

He shook his head, not to let her pronounce the words they had never saidto each other—even though they knew that both had said and heard them in thatmoment.

He approached, he took her in his arms, he kissed her mouth and held herfor a long time. When she looked up at his face, he was smiling down at herconfidently, derisively. It was a smile that told her he was in control ofhimself, of her, of everything, and ordered her to forget what she had seenin that first moment. "Hi, Slug," he said.

Feeling certain of nothing except that she must not ask questions, shesmiled and said, "Hi, Frisco."

She could have understood any change, but not the things she saw.

There was no sparkle of life in his face, no hint of amusement; the facehad become implacable. The plea of his first smile had not been a plea ofweakness; he had acquired an air of determination that seemed merciless. Heacted like a man who stood straight, under the weight of an unendurableburden. She saw what she could not have believed possible: that there werelines of bitterness in his face and that he looked tortured.

"Dagny, don't be astonished by anything I do," he said, "or by anything Imay ever do in the future."

That was the only explanation he granted her, then proceeded to act as ifthere were nothing to explain.

She could feel no more than a faint anxiety; it was impossible to fee!

fear for his fate or in his presence. When he laughed, she thought theywere back in the woods by the Hudson: he had not changed and never would.

The dinner was served in his room. She found it amusing to face him acrossa table laid out with the icy formality pertaining to excessive cost, in ahotel room designed as a European palace.

The Wayne-Falkland was the most distinguished hotel left on any continent.Its style of indolent luxury, of velvet drapes, sculptured panels andcandlelight, seemed a deliberate contrast to its function: no one couldafford its hospitality except men who came to New York on business, to settletransactions involving the world. She noticed that the manner of the waiterswho served their dinner suggested a special deference to this particularguest of the hotel, and that Francisco did not notice it. He wasindifferently at home. He had long since become accustomed to the fact thathe was Senor d'Anconia of d'Anconia Copper.

But she thought it strange that he did not speak about his work. She hadexpected it to be his only interest, the first thing he would share with her.He did not mention it. He led her to talk, instead, about her job, herprogress, and what she felt for Taggart Transcontinental. She spoke of it asshe had always spoken to him, in the knowledge that he was the only one whocould understand her passionate devotion. He made no comment, but he listenedintently.

A waiter had turned on the radio for dinner music; they had paid noattention to it. But suddenly, a crash of sound jarred the room, almost as ifa subterranean blast had struck the walls and made them tremble. The shockcame, not from the loudness, but from the quality of the sounds. It wasHalley's new Concerto, recently written, the Fourth.

They sat in silence, listening to the statement of rebellion—the anthem ofthe triumph of the great victims who would refuse to accept pain. Franciscolistened, looking out at the city.

Without transition or warning, he asked, his voice oddly unstressed,"Dagny, what would you say if I asked you to leave Taggart Transcontinentaland let it go to hell, as it will when your brother takes over?"

"What would I say if you asked me to consider the idea of committingsuicide?" she answered angrily.

He remained silent.

"Why did you say that?" she snapped. "I didn't think you'd joke about it.It's not like you."

There was no touch of humor in his face. He answered quietly, gravely,"No. Of course. I shouldn't."

She brought herself to question him about his work. He answered thequestions; he volunteered nothing. She repeated to him the comments of theindustrialists about the brilliant prospects of d'Anconia Copper under hismanagement. "That's true," he said, his voice lifeless.

In sudden anxiety, not knowing what prompted her, she asked, "Francisco,why did you come to New York?"

He answered slowly, "To see a friend who called for me,"

"Business ?"

Looking past her, as if answering a thought of his own, a faint smile ofbitter amusement on his face, but his voice strangely soft and sad, heanswered: "Yes."

It was long past midnight when she awakened in bed by his side.

No sounds came from the city below. The stillness of the room made lifeseem suspended for a while. Relaxed in happiness and in complete exhaustion,she turned lazily to glance at him. He lay on his back, half propped by apillow. She saw his profile against the foggy glow of the night sky in thewindow. He was awake, his eyes were open. He held his mouth closed like a manlying in resignation in unbearable pain, bearing it, making no attempt tohide it.

She was too frightened to move. He felt her glance and turned to her.

He shuddered suddenly, he threw off the blanket, he looked at her nakedbody, then he fell forward and buried his face between her breasts. He heldher shoulders, hanging onto her convulsively. She heard the words, muffled,his mouth pressed to her skin: "I can't give it up! I can't!"

"What?" she whispered.

"You. "

"Why should-"

"And everything."

"Why should you give it up?"

"Dagny! Help me to remain. To refuse. Even though he's right!"

She asked evenly, 'To refuse what, Francisco?"

He did not answer, only pressed his face harder against her.

She lay very still, conscious of nothing but a supreme need of caution.

His head on her breast, her hand caressing his hair gently, steadily, shelay looking up at the ceiling of the room, at the sculptured garlands faintlyvisible in the darkness, and she waited, numb with terror.

He moaned, "It's right, but it's so hard to do! Oh God, it's so hard!"

After a while, he raised his head. He sat up. He had stopped trembling.

"What is it, Francisco?"

"I can't tell you." His voice was simple, open, without attempt todisguise suffering, but it was a voice that obeyed him now. "You're not readyto hear it."

"I want to help you."

"You can't."

"You said, to help you refuse.""I can't refuse."

"Then let me share it with you."He shook his head.

He sat looking down at her, as if weighing a question. Then he shook hishead again, in answer to himself.

"If I'm not sure I can stand it," he said, and the strange new note in hisvoice was tenderness, "how could you?"

She said slowly, with effort, trying to keep herself from screaming,"Francisco, I have to know."

"Will you forgive me? I know you're frightened, and it's cruel. But willyou do this for me—will you let it go, just let it go, and don't ask meanything?"

«I_"

"That's all you can do for me. Will you?""Yes, Francisco."

"Don't be afraid for me. It was just this once. It won't happen to meagain. It will become much easier . . . later.""If I could-"

"No. Go to sleep, dearest,"

It was the first time he had ever used that word.

In the morning, he faced her openly, not avoiding her anxious glance, butsaying nothing about it. She saw both serenity and suffering in the calm ofhis face, an expression like a smile of pain, though he was not smiling.Strangely, it made him look younger. He did not look like a man bearing

torture now, but like a man who sees that which makes the torture worthbearing.

She did not question him. Before leaving, she asked only, "When will I seeyou again?"

He answered, "I don't know. Don't wait for me, Dagny. Next time we meet,you will not want to see me. I will have a reason for the things I'll do. ButI can't tell you the reason and you will be right to damn me. I am notcommitting the contemptible act of asking you to take me on faith. You haveto live by your own knowledge and judgment. You will damn me. You will behurt. Try not to let it hurt you too much. Remember that I told you this andthat it was all I could tell you."

She heard nothing from him or about him for a year. When she began to heargossip and to read newspaper stories, she did not believe, at first, thatthey referred to Francisco d'Anconia. After a while, she had to believe it.

She read the story of the party he gave on his yacht, in the harbor ofValparaiso; the guests wore bathing suits, and an artificial rain ofchampagne and flower petals kept falling upon the decks throughout the night.

She read the story of the party he gave at an Algerian desert resort; hebuilt a pavilion of thin sheets of ice and presented every woman guest withan ermine wrap, as a gift to be worn for the occasion, on condition that theyremove their wraps, then their evening gowns, then all the rest, in tempowith the melting of the walls.

She read the accounts of the business ventures he undertook at lengthyintervals; the ventures were spectacularly successful and ruined hiscompetitors, but he indulged in them as in an occasional sport, staging asudden raid, then vanishing from the industrial scene for a year or two,leaving d'Anconia Copper to the management of his employees.

She read the interview where he said, "Why should I wish to make money? Ihave enough to permit three generations of descendants to have as good a timeas I'm having."

She saw him once, at a reception given by an ambassador in New York. Hebowed to her courteously, he smiled, and he looked at her with a glance inwhich no past existed. She drew him aside. She said only, "Francisco, why?""Why—what?" he asked. She turned away. "I warned you," he said. She did nottry to see him again.

She survived it. She was able to survive it, because she did not believein suffering. She faced with astonished indignation the ugly fact of feelingpain, and refused to let it matter. Suffering was a senseless accident, itwas not part of life as she saw it. She would not allow pain to becomeimportant. She had no name for the kind of resistance she offered, for theemotion from which the resistance came; but the words that stood as itsequivalent in her mind were: It does not count —it is not to be takenseriously. She knew these were the words, even in the moments when there wasnothing left within her but screaming and she wished she could lose thefaculty of consciousness so that it would not tell her that what could not betrue was true. Not to be taken seriously—an immovable certainty within herkept repeating—

pain and ugliness are never to be taken seriously.

She fought it. She recovered. Years helped her to reach the day when shecould face her memories indifferently, then the day when she felt nonecessity to face them. It was finished and of no concern to her any longer.

There had been no other men in her life. She did not know whether this hadmade her unhappy. She had had no time to know. She found the clean, brilliantsense of life as she wanted it—in her work. Once, Francisco had given her thesame sense, a feeling that belonged with her work and in her world. The menshe had met since were like the men she met at her first ball.

She had won the battle against her memories. But one form of tortureremained, untouched by the years, the torture of the word "why?"

Whatever the tragedy he met, why had Francisco taken the ugliest way ofescape, as ignoble as the way of some cheap alcoholic? The boy she had knowncould not have become a useless coward. An incomparable mind could not turnits ingenuity to the invention of melting ballrooms. Yet he had and did, andthere was no explanation to make it conceivable and to let her forget him inpeace. She could not doubt the fact of what he had been; she could not doubtthe fact of what he had become; yet one made the other impossible. At times,she almost doubted her own rationality or the existence of any rationalityanywhere; but this was a doubt which she did not permit to anyone. Yet therewas no explanation, no reason, no clue to any conceivable reason —and in allthe days of ten years she had found no hint of an answer.

No, she thought—as she walked through the gray twilight, past the'

windows of abandoned shops, to the Wayne-Falkland Hotel—no, there could beno answer. She would not seek it. It did not matter now.

The remnant of violence, the emotion rising as a thin trembling withinher, was not for the man she was going to see; it was a cry of protestagainst a sacrilege—against the destruction of what had been greatness.

In a break between buildings, she saw the towers of the Wayne Falkland.She felt a slight jolt, in her lungs and legs, that stopped her for aninstant. Then she walked on evenly.

By the time she walked through the marble lobby, to the elevator, thendown the wide, velvet-carpeted, soundless corridors of the Wayne Falkland,she felt nothing but a cold anger that grew colder with every step.

She was certain of the anger when she knocked at his door. She heard hisvoice, answering, "Come in." She jerked the door open and entered.

Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia sat on the floor,playing marbles.

Nobody ever wondered whether Francisco d'Anconia was good-looking or not;it seemed irrelevant; when he entered a room, it was impossible to look atanyone else. His tall, slender figure had an air of distinction, tooauthentic to be modern, and he moved as if he had a cape floating behind himin the wind. People explained him by saying that he had the vitality of ahealthy animal, but they knew dimly that that was not correct. He had thevitality of a healthy human being, a thing so rare that no one could identifyit. He had the power of certainty.

Nobody described his appearance as Latin, yet the word applied to him, notin its present, but in its original sense, not pertaining to Spain, but toancient Rome. His body seemed designed as an exercise in consistency ofstyle, a style made of gauntness, of tight flesh, long legs and swiftmovements. His features had the fine precision of sculpture. His hair wasblack and straight, swept back. The suntan of his skin intensified thestartling color of his eyes: they were a pure, clear blue. His face was open,its rapid changes of expression reflecting whatever he felt, as if he hadnothing to hide. The blue eyes were still and changeless, never giving a hintof what he thought.

He sat on the floor of his drawing room, dressed in sleeping pajamas ofthin black silk. The marbles spread on the carpet around him were made of thesemi-precious stones of his native country: carnelian and rock crystal. Hedid not rise when Dagny entered. He sat looking up at her, and a crystalmarble fell like a teardrop out of his hand. He smiled, the unchanged,insolent, brilliant smile of his childhood.

"Hi, Slug!"

She heard herself answering, irresistibly, helplessly, happily: "Hi,Frisco!"

She was looking at his face; it was the face she had known. It bore nomark of the kind of life he had led, nor of what she had seen on their lastnight together. There was no sign of tragedy, no bitterness, no tension—onlythe radiant mockery, matured and stressed, the look of dangerouslyunpredictable amusement, and the great, guiltless serenity of spirit. Butthis, she thought, was impossible; this was more shocking than all the rest.

His eyes were studying her: the battered coat thrown open, half slippingoff her shoulders, and the slender body in a gray suit that looked like anoffice uniform.

"If you came here dressed like this in order not to let me notice howlovely you are," he said, "you miscalculated. You're lovely. I wish I couldtell you what a relief it is to see a face that's intelligent though awoman's. But you don't want to hear it. That's not what you came here for."

The words were improper in so many ways, yet were said so lightly thatthey brought her back to reality, to anger and to the purpose of her visit.She remained standing, looking down at him, her face blank, refusing him anyrecognition of the personal, even of its power to offend her. She said, "Icame here to ask you a question."

"Go ahead."

"When you told those reporters that you came to New York to witness thefarce, which farce did you mean?"

He laughed aloud, like a man who seldom finds a chance to enjoy theunexpected.

"That's what I like about you, Dagny. There are seven million people inthe city of New York, at present. Out of seven million people, you are theonly one to whom it could have occurred that I wasn't talking about the Vaildivorce scandal."

"What were you talking about?"

"What alternative occurred to you?"

"The San Sebastian disaster."

"That's much more amusing than the Vail divorce scandal, isn't it?"

She said in the solemn, merciless tone of a prosecutor, "You did itconsciously, cold-bloodedly and with full intention."

"Don't you think it would be better if you took your coat off and satdown?"

She knew she had made a mistake by betraying too much intensity.

She turned coldly, removed her coat and threw it aside. He did not rise tohelp her. She sat down in an armchair. He remained on the floor, at somedistance, but it seemed as if he were sitting at her feet.

"What was it I did with full intention?" he asked.

"The entire San Sebastian swindle."

"What was my full intention?"

"That is what I want to know."

He chuckled, as if she had asked him to explain in conversation a complexscience requiring a lifetime of study.

"You knew that the San Sebastian mines were worthless," she said."You knew it before you began the whole wretched business.""Then why did I begin it?"

"Don't start telling me that you gained nothing. I know it. I know youlost fifteen million dollars of your own money. Yet it was done on purpose.""Can you think of a motive that would prompt me to do it?""No. It's inconceivable."

"Is it? You assume that I have a great mind, a great knowledge and a greatproductive ability, so that anything I undertake must necessarily besuccessful. And then you claim that I had no desire to put out my best effortfor the People's State of Mexico. Inconceivable, isn't it?"

"You knew, before you bought that property, that Mexico was in the handsof a looters' government. You didn't have to start a mining project forthem. "

"No, I didn't have to."

"You didn't give a damn about that Mexican government, one way or another,because—"

"You're wrong about that."

"—because you knew they'd seize those mines sooner or later. What you wereafter is your American stockholders."

"That's true." He was looking straight at her, he was not smiling, hisface was earnest. He added, "That's part of the truth."

"What's the rest?"

"It was not all I was after."

"What else?"

"That's for you to figure out."

"I came here because I wanted you to know that I am beginning tounderstand your purpose."

He smiled. "If you did, you wouldn't have come here."

"That's true. I don't understand and probably never shall. I am merelybeginning to see part of it.""Which part?"

"You had exhausted every other form of depravity and sought a new thrillby swindling people like Jim and his friends, in order to watch them squirm.I don't know what sort of corruption could make anyone enjoy that, but that'swhat you came to New York to see, at the right time."

"They certainly provided a spectacle of squirming on the grand scale. Yourbrother James in particular."

"They're rotten fools, but in this case their only crime was that theytrusted you. They trusted your name and your honor."

Again, she saw the look of earnestness and again knew with certainty thatit was genuine, when he said, "Yes. They did. I know it."

"And do you find it amusing?"

"No. I don't find it amusing at all."

He had continued playing with his marbles, absently, indifferently, takinga shot once in a while. She noticed suddenly the faultless accuracy of hisaim, the skill of his hands. He merely flicked his wrist and sent a drop ofstone shooting across the carpet to click sharply against another drop. Shethought of his childhood and of the predictions that anything he did would bedone superlatively.

"No," he said, "I don't find it amusing. Your brother James and hisfriends knew nothing about the copper-mining industry. They knew nothingabout making money. They did not think it necessary to learn. They consideredknowledge superfluous and judgment inessential. They observed that there Iwas in the world and that I made it my honor to know. They thought they couldtrust my honor. One does not betray a trust of this kind, does one?"

"Then you did betray it intentionally?"

"That's for you to decide. It was you who spoke about their trust and myhonor. I don't think in such terms any longer. . . ."He shrugged, adding, "Idon't give a damn about your brother James and his friends. Their theory wasnot new, it has worked for centuries. But it wasn't foolproof. There is justone point that they overlooked. They thought it was safe to ride on my brain,because they assumed that the goal of my journey was wealth. All theircalculations rested on the premise that I wanted to make money. What if Ididn't?"

"If you didn't, what did you want?"

"They never asked me that. Not to inquire about my aims, motives ordesires is an essential part of their theory."

"If you didn't want to make money, what possible motive could you havehad?"

"Any number of them. For instance, to spend it.""To spend money on a certain, total failure?"

"How was I to know that those mines were a certain, total failure?"

"How could you help knowing it?"

"Quite simply. By giving it no thought."

"You started that project without giving it any thought?"

"No, not exactly. But suppose I slipped up? I'm only human. I made amistake. I failed. I made a bad job of it." He flicked his wrist; a crystalmarble shot, sparkling, across the floor and cracked violently against abrown one at the other end of the room.

"I don't believe it," she said.

"No? But haven't I the right to be what is now accepted as human?Should I pay for everybody's mistakes and never be permitted one of myown ? "

"That's not like you."

"No?" He stretched himself full-length on the carpet, lazily, relaxing.

"Did you intend me to notice that if you think I did it on purpose, thenyou still give me credit for having a purpose? You're still unable to acceptme as a bum?"

She closed her eyes. She heard him laughing; it was the gayest sound hithe world. She opened her eyes hastily; but there was no hint of cruelty inhis face, only pure laughter.

"My motive, Dagny? You don't think that it's the simplest one of all—

the spur of the moment?"

No, she thought, no, that's not true; not if he laughed like that, not ifhe looked as he did. The capacity for unclouded enjoyment, she thought, doesnot belong to irresponsible fools; an inviolate peace of spirit is not theachievement of a drifter; to be able to laugh like that is the end result ofthe most profound, most solemn thinking.

Almost dispassionately, looking at his figure stretched on the carpet ather feet, she observed what memory it brought back to her: the black pajamasstressed the long lines of his body, the open collar showed a smooth, young,sunburned skin—and she thought of the figure in black slacks and shirtstretched beside her on the grass at sunrise. She had felt pride then, thepride of knowing that she owned his body; she still felt it. She rememberedsuddenly, specifically, the excessive acts of their intimacy; the memoryshould have been offensive to her now, but wasn't. It was still pride,without regret or hope, an emotion that had no power to reach her and thatshe had no power to destroy.

Unaccountably, by an association of feeling that astonished her, sheremembered what had conveyed to her recently the same sense of consummate joyas his.

"Francisco," she heard herself saying softly, "we both loved the music ofRichard Halley. ...""I still love it.""Have you ever met him?""Yes. Why?"

"Do you happen to know whether he has written a Fifth Concerto?"

He remained perfectly still. She had thought him impervious to shock; hewasn't. But she could not attempt to guess why of all the things she hadsaid, this should be the first to reach him. It was only an instant; then heasked evenly, "What makes you think he has?"

"Well, has he?"

"You know that there are only four Halley Concertos.""Yes. But I wondered whether he had written another one."

"He has stopped writing.""I know."

"Then what made you ask that?"

"Just an idle thought. What is he doing now? Where is he?""I don't know. I haven't seen him for a long time. What made you thinkthat there was a Fifth Concerto?"

"I didn't say there was. I merely wondered about it.""Why did you think of Richard Halley just now?"

"Because"—she felt her control cracking a little—"because my mind can'tmake the leap from Richard Halley's music to ... to Mrs.Gilbert Vail."

He laughed, relieved. "Oh, that? . . . Incidentally, if you've beenfollowing my publicity, have you noticed a funny little discrepancy in thestory of Mrs. Gilbert Vail?"

"I don't read the stuff."

"You should. She gave such a beautiful description of last New Year's Eve,which we spent together in my villa in the Andes. The moonlight on themountain peaks, and the blood-red flowers hanging on vines in the openwindows. See anything wrong in the picture?"

She said quietly, "It's I who should ask you that, and I'm not going to."

"Oh, I see nothing wrong—except that last New Year's Eve I was in El Paso,Texas, presiding at the opening of the San Sebastian Line of TaggartTranscontinental, as you should remember, even if you didn't choose to bepresent on the occasion. I had my picture taken with my arms around yourbrother James and the Senor Orren Boyle."

She gasped, remembering that this was true, remembering also that she hadseen Mrs. Vail's story in the newspapers.

"Francisco, what . . . what does that mean?"

He chuckled. "Draw your own conclusions. . . . Dagny"—his face wasserious—"why did you think of Halley writing a Fifth Concerto?

Why not a new symphony or opera? Why specifically a concerto?""Why does that disturb you?"

"It doesn't." He added softly, "I still love his music, Dagny." Then hespoke lightly again. "But it belonged to another age. Our age provides adifferent kind of entertainment."

He rolled over on his back and lay with his hands crossed under his head,looking up as if he were watching the scenes of a movie farce unrolling onthe ceiling.

"Dagny, didn't you enjoy the spectacle of the behavior of the People'sState of Mexico in regard to the San Sebastian Mines? Did you read theirgovernment's speeches and the editorials in their newspapers?

They're saying that I am an unscrupulous cheat who has defrauded them.They expected to have a successful mining concern to seize. I had no right todisappoint them like that. Did you read about the scabby little bureaucratwho wanted them to sue me?"

He laughed, lying flat on his back; his arms were thrown wide on thecarpet, forming a cross with his body; he seemed disarmed, relaxed and young.

"It was worth whatever it's cost me. I could afford the price of thatshow. If I had staged it intentionally, I would have beaten the record of theEmperor Nero. What's burning a city—compared to tearing the lid off hell andletting men see it?"

He raised himself, picked up a few marbles and sat shaking them absentlyin his hand; they clicked with the soft, clear sound of good stone. Sherealized suddenly that playing with those marbles was not a deliberateaffectation on his part; it was restlessness; he could not remain inactivefor long.

"The government of the People's State of Mexico has issued aproclamation," he said, "asking the people to be patient and put up withhardships just a little longer. It seems that the copper fortune of the SanSebastian Mines was part of the plans of the central planning council.

It was to raise everybody's standard of living and provide a roast of porkevery Sunday for every man, woman, child and abortion in the People's Stateof Mexico. Now the planners are asking their people not to blame thegovernment, but to blame the depravity of the rich, because I turned out tobe an irresponsible playboy, instead of the greedy capitalist I was expectedto be. How were they to know, they're asking, that I would let them down?Well, true enough. How were they to know it?"

She noticed the way he fingered the marbles in his hand. He was notconscious of it, he was looking off into some grim distance, but she feltcertain that the action was a relief to him, perhaps as a contrast. Hisfingers were moving slowly, feeling the texture of the stones with sensualenjoyment. Instead of finding it crude, she found it strangely attractive—

as if, she thought suddenly, as if sensuality were not physical at all,but came from a fine discrimination of the spirit.

"And that's not all they didn't know," he said. "They're in for some moreknowledge. There's that housing settlement for the workers of San Sebastian.It cost eight million dollars. Steel-frame houses, with plumbing, electricityand refrigeration. Also a school, a church, a hospital and a movie theater. Asettlement built for people who had lived in hovels made of driftwood andstray tin cans. My reward for building it was to be the privilege of escapingwith my skin, a special concession due to the accident of my not being anative of the People's State of Mexico. That workers' settlement was alsopart of their plans.

A model example of progressive State housing. Well, those steel-framehouses arc mainly cardboard, with a coating of good imitation shellac, Theywon't stand another year. The plumbing pipes—as well as most of our miningequipment—were purchased from the dealers whose main source of supply are thecity dumps of Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro. I'd give those pipes anotherfive months, and the electric system about six. The wonderful roads we gradedup four thousand feet of rock for the People's State of Mexico, will not lastbeyond a couple of winters: they're cheap cement without foundation, and thebracing at the bad turns is just painted clapboard. Wait for one goodmountain slide. The church, I think, will stand. They'll need it."

"Francisco," she whispered, "did you do it on purpose?"

He raised his head; she was startled to see that his face had a look ofinfinite weariness. "Whether I did it on purpose," he said, "or throughneglect, or through stupidity, don't you understand that that doesn't makeany difference? The same element was missing."

She was trembling. Against all her decisions and control, she cried,"Francisco! If you see what's happening in the world, if you understand allthe things you said, you can't laugh about it! You, of all men, you shouldfight them!"

"Whom?"

"The looters, and those who make world-looting possible. The Mexicanplanners and their kind."

His smile had a dangerous edge. "No, my dear. It's you that I have tofight."

She looked at him blankly. "What are you trying to say?"

"I am saying that the workers' settlement of San Sebastian cost eightmillion dollars," he answered with slow emphasis, his voice hard. "The pricepaid for those cardboard houses was the price that could have bought steelstructures. So was the price paid for every other item. That money went tomen who grow rich by such methods. Such men do not remain rich for long. The

money will go into channels which will carry it, not to the most productive,but to the most corrupt. By the standards of our time, the man who has theleast to offer is the man who wins. That money will vanish in projects suchas the San Sebastian Mines,"

She asked with effort, "Is that what you're after?"

"Yes."

"Is that what you find amusing?""Yes."

"I am thinking of your name," she said, while another part of her mind wascrying to her that reproaches were useless. "It was a tradition of yourfamily that a d'Anconia always left a fortune greater than the one hereceived."

"Oh yes, my ancestors had a remarkable ability for doing the right thingat the right time—and for making the right investments. Of course,'investment' is a relative term. It depends on what you wish to accomplish.For instance, look at San Sebastian. It cost me fifteen million dollars, butthese fifteen million wiped out forty million belonging to TaggartTranscontinental, thirty-five million belonging to stockholders such as JamesTaggart and Orren Boyle, and hundreds of millions which will be lost insecondary consequences. That's not a bad return on an investment, is it,Dagny?"

She was sitting straight. "Do you realize what you're saying?"

"Oh, fully! Shall I beat you to it and name the consequences you weregoing to reproach me for? First, I don't think that Taggart Transcontinentalwill recover from its loss on that preposterous San Sebastian Line. You thinkit will, but it won't. Second, the San Sebastian helped your brother James todestroy the Phoenix-Durango, which was about the only good railroad leftanywhere."

"You realize all that?"

"And a great deal more."

"Do you"—she did not know why she had to say it, except that the memory ofthe face with the dark, violent eyes seemed to stare at her—"do you know Ellis Wyatt?""Sure."

"Do you know what this might do to him?"

"Yes. He's the one who's going to be wiped out next."

"Do you . . . find that . . . amusing?"

"Much more amusing than the ruin of the Mexican planners."

She stood up. She had called him corrupt for years; she had feared it, shehad thought about it, she had tried to forget it and never think of it again;but she had never suspected how far the corruption had gone.

She was not looking at him; she did not know that she was saying it aloud,quoting his words of the past: ". . . who'll do greater honor, you—to NatTaggart, or I—to Sebastian d'Anconia . . ."

"But didn't you realize that I named those mines in honor of my greatancestor? I think it was a tribute which he would have liked."

It took her a moment to recover her eyesight; she had never known what wasmeant by blasphemy or what one felt on encountering it; she knew it now.

He had risen and stood courteously, smiling down at her; it was a coldsmile, impersonal and unrevealing.

She was trembling, but it did not matter. She did not care what he saw orguessed or laughed at.

"I came here because I wanted to know the reason for what you've done withyour life," she said tonelessly, without anger.

"I have told you the reason," he answered gravely, "but you don't want tobelieve it."

"I kept seeing you as you were. I couldn't forget it. And that you shouldhave become what you are—that does not belong in a rational universe.""No? And the world as you see it around you, does?"

"You were not the kind of man who gets broken by any kind of world"

"True."

"Then-why?"

He shrugged. "Who is John Gait?""Oh, don't use gutter language!"

He glanced at her. His lips held the hint of a smile, but his eyes werestill, earnest and, for an instant, disturbingly perceptive."Why?" she repeated.

He answered, as he had answered in the night, in this hotel, ten yearsago, "You're not ready to hear it."

He did not follow her to the door. She had put her hand on the doorknobwhen she turned—and stopped. He stood across the room, looking at her; it wasa glance directed at her whole person; she knew its meaning and it held hermotionless, "I still want to sleep with you," he said. "But I am not a manwho is happy enough to do it."

"Not happy enough?" she repeated in complete bewilderment.

He laughed. "Is it proper that that should be the first thing you'danswer?" He waited, but she remained silent. "You want it, too, don't you?"

She was about to answer "No," but realized that the truth was worse thanthat. "Yes," she answered coldly, "but it doesn't matter to me that I wantit. "

He smiled, in open appreciation, acknowledging the strength she had neededto say it.

But he was not smiling when he said, as she opened the door to leave, "Youhave a great deal of courage, Dagny. Some day, you'll have enough of it.""Of what? Courage?"But he did not answer.

CHAPTER VITHE NON-COMMERCIAL

Rearden pressed his forehead to the mirror and tried not to think. Thatwas the only way he could go through with it, he told himself.

He concentrated on the relief of the mirror's cooling touch, wondering howone went about forcing one's mind into blankness, particularly after alifetime lived on the axiom that the constant, clearest, most ruthlessfunction of his rational faculty was his foremost duty. He wondered why noeffort had ever seemed beyond his capacity, yet now he could not scrape upthe strength to stick a few black pearl studs into his starched white shirtfront.

This was his wedding anniversary and he had known for three months thatthe party would take place tonight, as Lillian wished.

He had promised it to her, safe in the knowledge that the party was a longway off and that he would attend to it, when the time came, as he attended toevery duty on his overloaded schedule. Then, during three months of eighteen-hour workdays, he had forgotten it happily—until half an hour ago, when, longpast dinner time, his secretary had entered his office and said firmly, "Yourparty, Mr. Rearden." He had cried, "Good God!" leaping to his feet; he hadhurried home, rushed up the stairs, started tearing his clothes off and gonethrough the routine of dressing, conscious only of the need to hurry, not ofthe purpose.

When the full realization of the purpose struck him like a sudden blow, hestopped.

"You don't care for anything but business." He had heard it all his life,pronounced as a verdict of damnation. He had always known that business wasregarded as some sort of secret, shameful cult, which one did not impose oninnocent laymen, that people thought of it as of an ugly necessity, to beperformed but never mentioned, that to talk shop was an offense againsthigher sensibilities, that just as one washed machine grease off one's handsbefore coming home, so one was supposed to wash the stain of business offone's mind before entering a drawing room. He had never held that creed, buthe had accepted it as natural that his family should hold it. He took it forgranted—wordlessly, in the manner of a feeling absorbed in childhood, leftunquestioned and unnamed—that he had dedicated himself, like the martyr ofsome dark religion, to the service of a faith which was his passionate love,but which made him an outcast among men, whose sympathy he was not to expect.

He had accepted the tenet that it was his duty to give his wife some formof existence unrelated to business. But he had never found the capacity to doit or even to experience a sense of guilt. He could neither force himself tochange nor blame her if she chose to condemn him.

He had given Lillian none of his time for months—:no, he thought, foryears; for the eight years of their marriage. He had no interest to spare forher interests, not even enough to learn just what they were.

She had a large circle of friends, and he had heard it said that theirnames represented the heart of the country's culture, but he had never hadtime to meet them or even to acknowledge their fame by knowing whatachievements had earned it. He knew only that he often saw their names on themagazine covers on newsstands. If Lillian resented his attitude, he thought,she was right. If her manner toward him was objectionable, he deserved it. Ifhis family called him heartless, it was true.

He had never spared himself in any issue. When a problem came up at themills, his first concern was to discover what error he had made; he did notsearch for anyone's fault but his own; it was of himself that he demandedperfection. He would grant himself no mercy now; he took the blame. But at

the mills, it prompted him to action in an immediate impulse to correct theerror; now, it had no effect. . . . Just a few more minutes, he thought,standing against the mirror, his eyes closed.

He could not stop the thing in his mind that went on throwing words athim; it was like trying to plug a broken hydrant with his bare hands.

Stinging jets, part words, part pictures, kept shooting at his brain. . .

Hours of it, he thought, hours to spend watching the eyes of the guestsgetting heavy with boredom if they were sober or glazing into an imbecilestare if they weren't, and pretend that he noticed neither, and strain tothink of something to say to them, when he had nothing to say —while heneeded hours of inquiry to find a successor for the superintendent of hisrolling mills who had resigned suddenly, without explanation—he had to do itat once—men of that sort were so hard to find—and if anything happened tobreak the flow of the rolling mills—it was the Taggart rail that was beingrolled. ... He remembered the silent reproach, the look of accusation,long-bearing patience and scorn, which he always saw in the eyes of hisfamily when they caught some evidence of his passion for his business—and thefutility of his silence, of his hope that they would not think Rearden Steelmeant as much to him as it did—like a drunkard pretending indifference toliquor, among people who watch him with the scornful amusement of their fullknowledge of his shameful weakness. ... "I heard you last night coming homeat two in the morning, where were you?" his mother saying to him at thedinner table, and Lillian answering, "Why, at the mills, of course," asanother wife would say, "At the corner saloon." . . . Or Lillian asking him,the hint of a wise half-smile on her face, "What were you doing in New Yorkyesterday?" "It was a banquet with the boys." "Business?" "Yes." "Of course"—and Lillian turning away, nothing more, except the shameful realization thathe had almost hoped she would think he had attended some sort of obscene stagparty. . . .

An ore carrier had gone down in a storm on Lake Michigan, with thousandsof tons of Rearden ore—those boats were falling apart—if he didn't take itupon himself to help them obtain the replacements they needed, the owners ofthe line would go bankrupt, and there was no other line left in operation onLake Michigan. . . . "That nook?"

said Lillian, pointing to an arrangement of settees and coffee tables intheir drawing room. "Why, no, Henry, it's not new, but I suppose I shouldfeel flattered that three weeks is all it took you to notice it. It's my ownadaptation of the morning room of a famous French palace —but things likethat can't possibly interest you, darling, there's no stock market quotationon them, none whatever." . . . The order for copper, which he had placed sixmonths ago, had not been delivered, the promised date had been postponedthree tunes—"We can't help it, Mr. Rearden"—he had to find another company todeal with, the supply of copper was becoming increasingly uncertain. . . .Philip did not smile, when he looked up in the midst of a speech he wasmaking to some friend of their mother's, about some organization he hadjoined, but there was something that suggested a smile of superiority in theloose muscles of his face when he said, "No, you wouldn't care for this, it'snot business, Henry, not business at all, it's a strictly non-commercialendeavor." . . . That contractor in Detroit, with the job of rebuilding alarge factory, was considering structural shapes of Rearden Metal —he shouldfly to Detroit and speak to him in person—he should have done it a week ago—he could have done it tonight. . . . "You're not listening," said his motherat the breakfast table, when his mind wandered to the current coal priceindex, while she was telling him about the dream she'd had last night."You've never listened to a living soul.

You're not interested in anything but yourself. You don't give a damnabout people, not about a single human creature on God's earth."

. . . The typed pages lying on the desk in his office were a report on thetests of an airplane motor made of Rearden Metal—perhaps of all things onearth, the one he wanted most at this moment was to read it-it had lain on his desk, untouched, for three days, he had had no time forit—why didn't he do it now and—

He shook his head violently, opening his eyes, stepping back from themirror.

He tried to reach for the shirt studs. He saw his hand reaching, instead,for the pile of mail on his dresser. It was mail picked as urgent, it had tobe read tonight, but he had had no time to read it in the office.

His secretary had stuffed it into his pocket on his way out. He had thrownit there while undressing.

A newspaper clipping fluttered down to the floor. It was an editorialwhich his secretary had marked with an angry stash in red pencil. It wasentitled "Equalization of Opportunity." He had to read it: there had been toomuch talk about this issue in the last three months, ominously too much, Heread it, with the sound of voices and forced laughter coming from downstairs,reminding him that the guests were arriving, that the party had started andthat he would face the bitter, reproachful glances of his family when he camedown.

The editorial said that at a time of dwindling production, shrinkingmarkets and vanishing opportunities to make a living, it was unfair to letone man hoard several business enterprises, while others had none; it wasdestructive to let a few corner all the resources, leaving others no chance;competition was essential to society, and it was society's duty to see thatno competitor ever rose beyond the range of anybody who wanted to competewith him. The editorial predicted the passage of a bill which had beenproposed, a bill forbidding any person or corporation to own more than onebusiness concern.

Wesley Mouch, his Washington man, had told Rearden not to worry; the fightwould be stiff, he had said, but the bill would be defeated.

Rearden understood nothing about that kind of fight. He left it to Mouchand his staff. He could barely find time to skim through the reports fromWashington and to sign the checks which Mouch requested for the battle.

Rearden did not believe that the bill would pass. He was incapable ofbelieving it. Having dealt with the clean reality of metals, technology,production all his life, he had acquired the conviction that one had toconcern oneself with the rational, not the insane—that one had to seek thatwhich was right, because the right answer always won—that the senseless, thewrong, the monstrously unjust could not work, could not succeed, could donothing but defeat itself. A battle against a thing such as that bill seemedpreposterous and faintly embarrassing to him, as if he were suddenly asked tocompete with a man who calculated steel mixtures by the formulas ofnumerology.

He had told himself that the issue was dangerous. But the loudestscreaming of the most hysterical editorial roused no emotion in him—

while a variation of a decimal point in a laboratory report on a test ofRearden Metal made him leap to his feet in eagerness or apprehension.

He had no energy to spare for anything else.

He crumpled the editorial and threw it into the wastebasket. He felt theleaden approach of that exhaustion which he never felt at his job, theexhaustion that seemed to wait for him and catch him the moment he turned toother concerns. He felt as if he were incapable of any desire except adesperate longing for sleep, He told himself that he had to attend the party—

that his family had the right to demand it of him—that he had to learn tolike their kind of pleasure, for their sake, not his own.

He wondered why this was a motive that had no power to impel him.Throughout his life, whenever he became convinced that a course of action wasright, the desire to follow it had come automatically. What was happening tohim?—he wondered. The impossible conflict of feeling reluctance to do thatwhich was right—wasn't it the basic formula of moral corruption? To recognizeone's guilt, yet feel nothing but the coldest, most profound indifference—wasn't it a betrayal of that which had been the motor of his life-course andof his pride?

He gave himself no time to seek an answer. He finished dressing, quickly,pitilessly.

Holding himself erect, his tall figure moving with the unstressed,unhurried confidence of habitual authority, the white of a fine handkerchiefin the breast pocket of his black dinner jacket, he walked slowly down thestairs to the drawing room, looking—to the satisfaction of the dowagers whowatched him—like the perfect figure of a great industrialist.

He saw Lillian at the foot of the stairs. The patrician lines of a lemon-yellow Empire evening gown stressed her graceful body, and she stood like aperson proudly in control of her proper background.

He smiled; he liked to see her happy; it gave some reasonablejustification to the party.

He approached her—and stopped. She had always shown good taste in her useof jewelry, never wearing too much of it. But tonight she wore anostentatious display: a diamond necklace, earrings, rings and brooches. Herarms looked conspicuously bare by contrast. On her right wrist, as soleornament, she wore the bracelet of Rearden Metal. The glittering gems made itlook like an ugly piece of dime-store jewelry.

When he moved his glance from her wrist to her face, he found her lookingat him. Her eyes were narrowed and he could not define their expression; itwas a look that seemed both veiled and purposeful, the look of somethinghidden that flaunted its security from detection.

He wanted to tear the bracelet off her wrist. Instead, in obedience to hervoice gaily pronouncing an introduction, he bowed to the dowager who stoodbeside her, his face expressionless.

"Man? What is man? He's just a collection of chemicals with delusions ofgrandeur," said Dr. Pritchett to a group of guests across the room.

Dr. Pritchett picked a canape off a crystal dish, held it speared betweentwo straight fingers and deposited it whole into his mouth.

"Man's metaphysical pretensions," he said, "are preposterous. A miserablebit of protoplasm, full of ugly little concepts and mean little emotions—andit imagines itself important! Really, you know, that is the root of all thetroubles in the world."

"But which concepts are not ugly or mean, Professor?" asked an earnestmatron whose husband owned an automobile factory.

"None," said Dr. Pritchett, "None within the range of man's capacity."

A young man asked hesitantly, "But if we haven't any good concepts, how dowe know that the ones we've got are ugly? I mean, by what standard?"

"There aren't any standards."

This silenced his audience.

"The philosophers of the past were superficial," Dr. Pritchett went on."It remained for our century to redefine the purpose of philosophy.

The purpose of philosophy is not to help men find the meaning of life, butto prove to them that there isn't any."

An attractive young woman, whose father owned a coal mine, askedindignantly, "Who can tell us that?"

"I am trying to," said Dr. Pritchett. For the last three years, he hadbeen head of the Department of Philosophy at the Patrick Henry University.

Lillian Rearden approached, her jewels glittering under the lights.

The expression on her face was held to the soft hint of a smile, set andfaintly suggested, like the waves of her hair.

"It is this insistence of man upon meaning that makes him so difficult,"said Dr. Pritchett. "Once he realizes that he is of no importance whatever inthe vast scheme of the universe, that no possible significance can beattached to his activities, that it does not matter whether he lives or dies,he will become much more . . . tractable."

He shrugged and reached for another canape", A businessman said uneasily,"What I asked you about, Professor, was what you thought about theEqualization of Opportunity Bill."

"Oh, that?" said Dr. Pritchett. "But I believe I made it clear that I amin favor of it, because I am in favor of a free economy. A free economycannot exist without competition. Therefore, men must be forced to compete.Therefore, we must control men in order to force them to be free."

"But, look . . . isn't that sort of a contradiction?"

"Not in the higher philosophical sense. You must learn to see beyond thestatic definitions of old-fashioned thinking. Nothing is static in theuniverse. Everything is fluid."

"But it stands to reason that if—"

"Reason, my dear fellow, is the most naive of all superstitions. That, atleast, has been generally conceded in our age, ""But I don't quite understand how we can—"

"You suffer from the popular delusion of believing that things can beunderstood. You do not grasp the fact that the universe is a solidcontradiction."

"A contradiction of what?" asked the matron.

"Of itself."

"How . . . how's that?"

"My dear madam, the duty of thinkers is not to explain, but to demonstratethat nothing can be explained."

"Yes, of course . . . only . , , "

"The purpose of philosophy is not to seek knowledge, but to prove thatknowledge is impossible to man."

"But when we prove it," asked the young woman, "what's going to be left?""Instinct," said Dr. Pritchett reverently.

At the other end of the room, a group was listening to Balph Eubank. Hesat upright on the edge of an armchair, in order to counteract the appearanceof his face and figure, which had a tendency to spread if relaxed.

"The literature of the past," said Balph Eubank, "was a shallow fraud. Itwhitewashed life in order to please the money tycoons whom it served.Morality, free will, achievement, happy endings, and man as some sort ofheroic being—all that stuff is laughable to us. Our age has given depth toliterature for the first time, by exposing the real essence of life,"

A very young girl in a white evening gown asked timidly, "What is the realessence of life, Mr. Eubank?"

"Suffering," said Balph Eubank. "Defeat and suffering."

"But . . . but why? People are happy . . . sometimes . . . aren't they?"

"That is a delusion of those whose emotions are superficial."

The girl blushed. A wealthy woman who had inherited an oil refinery, askedguiltily, "What should we do to raise the people's literary taste, Mr.Eubank?"

"That is a great social problem," said Balph Eubank. He was described asthe literary leader of the age, but had never written a book that sold more

than three thousand copies. "Personally, I believe that an Equalization ofOpportunity Bill applying to literature would be the solution."

"Oh, do you approve of that Bill for industry? I'm not sure I know what tothink of it."

"Certainly, I approve of it. Our culture has sunk into a bog ofmaterialism. Men have lost all spiritual values in their pursuit of materialproduction and technological trickery. They're too comfortable. They willreturn to a nobler life if we teach them to bear privations. So we ought toplace a limit upon their material greed."

"I hadn't thought of it that way," said the woman apologetically.

"But how are you going to work an Equalization of Opportunity Bill forliterature, Ralph?" asked Mort Liddy. "That's a new one on me."

"My name is Balph," said Eubank angrily. "And it's a new one on youbecause it's my own idea."

"Okay, okay, I'm not quarreling, am I? I'm just asking." Mort Liddysmiled. He spent most of his time smiling nervously. He was a composer whowrote old-fashioned scores for motion pictures, and modern symphonies forsparse audiences.

"It would work very simply," said Balph Eubank. "There should be a lawlimiting the sale of any book to ten thousand copies. This would throw theliterary market open to new talent, fresh ideas and non-commercial writing.If people were forbidden to buy a million copies of the same piece of trash,they would be forced to buy better books."

"You've got something there," said Mort Liddy. "But wouldn't it be kindatough on the writers' bank accounts?"

"So much the better. Only those whose motive is not money-making should beallowed to write."

"But, Mr. Eubank," asked the young girl in the white dress, "what if morethan ten thousand people want to buy a certain book?""Ten thousand readers is enough for any book.""That's not what I mean. I mean, what if they want it?""That is irrelevant."

"But if a book has a good story which—"

"Plot is a primitive vulgarity in literature, " said Balph Eubankcontemptuously.

Dr. Pritchett, on his way across the room to the bar, stopped to say,"Quite so. Just as logic is a primitive vulgarity in philosophy."

"Just as melody is a primitive vulgarity in music," said Mort Liddy.

"What's all this noise?" asked Lillian Rearden, glittering to a stopbeside them.

"Lillian, my angel," Balph Eubank drawled, "did I tell you that I'mdedicating my new novel to you?""Why. thank you, darling."

"What is the name of your new novel?" asked the wealthy woman."The Heart Is a Milkman.""What is it about?""Frustration."

"But, Mr. Eubank," asked the young girl in the white dress, blushingdesperately, "if everything is frustration, what is there to live for?""Brother-love," said Balph Eubank grimly.

Bertram Scudder stood slouched against the bar. His long, thin face lookedas if it had shrunk inward, with the exception of his mouth and eyeballs,which were left to protrude as three soft globes. He was the editor of amagazine called The Future and he had written an article on Hank Rearden,entitled "The Octopus."

Bertram Scudder picked up his empty glass and shoved it silently towardthe bartender, to be refilled. He took a gulp from his fresh drink, noticed

the empty glass in front of Philip Rearden, who stood beside him, and jerkedhis thumb in a silent command to the bartender. He ignored the empty glass infront of Betty Pope, who stood at Philip's other side.

"Look, bud, " said Bertram Scudder, his eyeballs focused approximately inthe direction of Philip, "whether you like it or not, the Equalization ofOpportunity Bill represents a great step forward."

"What made you think that I did not like it, Mr. Scudder?" Philip askedhumbly.

"Well, it's going to pinch, isn't it? The long arm of society is going totrim a little off the hors d'oeuvres bill around here." He waved his hand atthe bar.

"Why do you assume that I object to that?"

"You don't?" Bertram Scudder asked without curiosity.

"I don't!" said Philip hotly. "I have always placed the public good aboveany personal consideration. I have contributed my time and money to Friendsof Global Progress in their crusade for the Equalization of Opportunity Bill.I think it is perfectly unfair that one man should get all the breaks andleave none to others."

Bertram Scudder considered him speculatively, but without particularinterest. "Well, that's quite unusually nice of you," he said.

"Some people do take moral issues seriously, Mr. Scudder," said Philip,with a gentle stress of pride in his voice.

"What's he talking about, Philip?" asked Betty Pope. "We don't knowanybody who owns more than one business, do we?"

"Oh, pipe down!" said Bertram Scudder, his voice bored.

"I don't see why there's so much fuss about that Equalization ofOpportunity Bill, " said Betty Pope aggressively, in the tone of an expert oneconomics. "I don't see why businessmen object to it. It's to their ownadvantage. If everybody else is poor, they won't have any market for theirgoods. But if they stop being selfish and share the goods they've hoarded—they'll have a chance to work hard and produce some more."

"I do not see why industrialists should be considered at all," saidScudder. "When the masses are destitute and yet there are goods available,it's idiotic to expect people to be stopped by some scrap of paper called aproperty deed. Property rights are a superstition. One holds property only bythe courtesy of those who do not seize it. The people can seize it at anymoment. If they can, why shouldn't they?"

"They should," said Claude Slagenhop. "They need it. Need is the onlyconsideration. If people are in need, we've got to seize things first andtalk about it afterwards."

Claude Slagenhop had approached and managed to squeeze himself betweenPhilip and Scudder, shoving Scudder aside imperceptibly.

Slagenhop was not tall or heavy, but he had a square, compact bulk, and abroken nose. He was the president of Friends of Global Progress.

"Hunger won't wait," said Claude Slagenhop. "Ideas are just hot air.

An empty belly is a solid fact. I've said in all my speeches that it's notnecessary to talk too much. Society is suffering for lack of businessopportunities at the moment, so we've got the right to seize suchopportunities as exist. Right is whatever's good for society."

"He didn't dig that ore single-handed, did he?" cried Philip suddenly, hisvoice shrill. "He had to employ hundreds of workers. They did it.

Why does he think he's so good?"

The two men looked at him, Scudder lifting an eyebrow, Slagenhop withoutexpression.

"Oh, dear me!" said Betty Pope, remembering.

Hank Rearden stood at a window in a dim recess at the end of the drawingroom. He hoped no one would notice him for a few minutes.

He had just escaped from a middle-aged woman who had been telling himabout her psychic experiences. He stood, looking out. Far in the distance,the red glow of Rearden Steel moved in the sky. He watched it for a moment'srelief.

He turned to look at the drawing room. He had never liked his house; ithad been Lillian's choice. But tonight, the shifting colors of the eveningdresses drowned out the appearance of the room and gave it an air ofbrilliant gaiety. He liked to see people being gay, even though he did notunderstand this particular manner of enjoyment.

He looked at the flowers, at the sparks of light on the crystal glasses,at the naked arms and shoulders of women. There was a cold wind outside,sweeping empty stretches of land. He saw the thin branches of a tree beingtwisted, like arms waving in an appeal for help.

The tree stood against the glow of the mills.

He could not name his sudden emotion. He had no words to state its cause,its quality, its meaning. Some part of it was joy, but it was solemn like theact of baring one's head—he did not know to whom.

When he stepped back into the crowd, he was smiling. But the smilevanished abruptly; he saw the entrance of a new guest: it was Dagny Taggart.

Lillian moved forward to meet her, studying her with curiosity. They hadmet before, on infrequent occasions, and she found it strange to see DagnyTaggart wearing an evening gown. It was a black dress with a bodice that fellas a cape over one arm and shoulder, leaving the other bare; the nakedshoulder was the gown's only ornament. Seeing her in the suits she wore, onenever thought of Dagny Taggart's body. The black dress seemed excessivelyrevealing—because it was astonishing to discover that the lines of hershoulder were fragile and beautiful, and that the diamond band on the wristof her naked arm gave her the most feminine of all aspects: the look of beingchained.

"Miss Taggart, it is such a wonderful surprise to see you here," saidLillian Rearden, the muscles of her face performing the motions of a smile."I had not really dared to hope that an invitation' from me would take youaway from your ever so much weightier concerns. Do permit me to feelflattered."

James Taggart had entered with his sister. Lillian smiled at him, in themanner of a hasty postscript, as if noticing him for the first time.

"Hello, James. That's your penalty for being popular—one tends to losesight of you in the surprise of seeing your sister."

"No one can match you in popularity, Lillian," he answered, smilingthinly, "nor ever lose sight of you."

"Me? Oh, but I am quite resigned to taking second place in the shadow ofmy husband. I am humbly aware that the wife of a great man has to becontented with reflected glory—don't you think so, Miss Taggart?"

"No," said Dagny, "I don't."

"Is this a compliment or a reproach, Miss Taggart? But do forgive me if Iconfess I'm helpless. Whom may I present to you? I'm afraid I have nothingbut writers and artists to offer, and they wouldn't interest you, I'm sure."

"I'd like to find Hank and say hello to him."

"But of course. James, do you remember you said you wanted to meet BalphEubank?—oh yes, he's here—I'll tell him that I heard you rave about his lastnovel at Mrs. Whitcomb's dinner!"

Walking across the room, Dagny wondered why she had said that she wantedto find Hank Rearden, what had prevented her from admitting that she had seenhim the moment she entered.

Rearden stood at the other end of the long room, looking at her.

He watched her as she approached, but he did not step forward to meet her.

"Hello, Hank."

"Good evening."

He bowed, courteously, impersonally, the movement of his body matching thedistinguished formality of his clothes. He did not smile."Thank you for inviting me tonight," she said gaily."I cannot claim that I knew you were coming."

"Oh? Then I'm glad that Mrs. Rearden thought of me. I wanted to make anexception."

"An exception?"

"I don't go to parties very often."

"I am pleased that you chose this occasion as the exception." He did notadd "Miss Taggart," but it sounded as if he had.

The formality of his manner was so unexpected that she was unable toadjust to it. "I wanted to celebrate," she said.

"To celebrate my wedding anniversary?"

"Oh, is it your wedding anniversary? I didn't know. My congratulations,Hank."

"What did you wish to celebrate?"

"I thought I'd permit myself a rest. A celebration of my own—in your honorand mine."

"For what reason?"

She was thinking of the new track on the rocky grades of the Coloradomountains, growing slowly toward the distant goal of the Wyatt oil fields.She was seeing the greenish-blue glow of the rails on the frozen ground,among the dried weeds, the naked boulders, the rotting shanties of half-starved settlements.

"In honor of the first sixty miles of Rearden Metal track," she answered.

"I appreciate it." The tone of his voice was the one that would have beenproper if he had said, "I've never heard of it."

She found nothing else to say. She felt as if she were speaking to astranger.

"Why, Miss Taggart!" a cheerful voice broke their silence. "Now this iswhat I mean when I say that Hank Rearden can achieve any miracle!"

A businessman whom they knew had approached, smiling at her in delightedastonishment. The three of them had often held emergency conferences aboutfreight rates and steel deliveries. Now he looked at her, his face an opencomment on the change in her appearance, the change, she thought, whichRearden had not noticed.

She laughed, answering the man's greeting, giving herself no time torecognize the unexpected stab of disappointment, the unadmitted thought thatshe wished she had seen this look on Rearden's face, instead. She exchanged afew sentences with the man. When she glanced around, Rearden was gone.

"So that is your famous sister?" said Balph Eubank to James Taggart,looking at Dagny across the room.

"I was not aware that my sister was famous," said Taggart, a faint bite inhis voice.

"But, my good man, she's an unusual phenomenon in the field of economics,so you must expect people to talk about her. Your sister is a symptom of theillness of our century. A decadent product of the machine age. Machines havedestroyed man's humanity, taken him away from the soil, robbed him of hisnatural arts, killed his soul and turned him into an insensitive robot.There's an example of it—a woman who runs a railroad, instead of practicingthe beautiful craft of the handloom and bearing children."

Rearden moved among the guests, trying not to be trapped intoconversation. He looked at the room; he saw no one he wished to approach.

"Say, Hank Rearden, you're not such a bad fellow at all when seen close upin the lion's own den. You ought to give us a press conference once in awhile, you'd win us over."

Rearden turned and looked at the speaker incredulously. It was a youngnewspaperman of the seedier sort, who worked on a radical tabloid. Theoffensive familiarity of his manner seemed to imply that he chose to be rudeto Rearden because he knew that Rearden should never have permitted himselfto associate with a man of his kind.

Rearden would not have allowed him inside the mills; but the man wasLillian's guest; he controlled himself; he asked dryly, "What do you want?"

"You're not so bad. You've got talent. Technological talent. But, ofcourse, I don't agree with you about Rearden Metal."

"I haven't asked you to agree."

"Well, Bertram Scudder said that your policy—" the man startedbelligerently, pointing toward the bar, but stopped, as if he had slidfarther than he intended.

Rearden looked at the untidy figure slouched against the bar. Lillian hadintroduced them, but he had paid no attention to the name. He turned sharplyand walked off, in a manner that forbade the young bum to tag him.

Lillian glanced up at his face, when Rearden approached her in the midstof a group, and, without a word, stepped aside where they could not be heard.

"Is that Scudder of The Future?" he asked, pointing.

"Why, yes."

He looked at her silently, unable to begin to believe it, unable to findthe lead of a thought with which to begin to understand. Her eyes werewatching him.

"How could you invite him here?" he asked.

"Now, Henry, don't let's be ridiculous. You don't want to be narrowminded, do you? You must learn to tolerate the opinions of others and respecttheir right of free speech."

"In my house?"

"Oh, don't be stuffy!"

He did not speak, because his consciousness was held, not by coherentstatements, but by two pictures that seemed to glare at him insistently.

He saw the article, "The Octopus," by Bertram Scudder, which was not anexpression of ideas, but a bucket of slime emptied in public—an article thatdid not contain a single fact, not even an invented one, but poured a streamof sneers and adjectives in which nothing was clear except the filthy maliceof denouncing without considering proof necessary. And he saw the lines ofLillian's profile, the proud purity which he had sought in marrying her.

When he noticed her again, he realized that the vision of her profile wasin his own mind, because she was turned to him full-face, watching him. Inthe sudden instant of returning to reality, he thought that what he saw inher eyes was enjoyment. But in the next instant he reminded himself that hewas sane and that this was not possible.

"It's the first time you've invited that . . ." he used an obscene wordwith unemotional precision, "to my house. It's the last."

"How dare you use such—"

"Don't argue, Lillian. If you do, I'll throw him out right now."

He gave her a moment to answer, to object, to scream at him if she wished.She remained silent, not looking at him, only her smooth cheeks seemedfaintly drawn inward, as if deflated.

Moving blindly away through the coils of lights, voices and perfume, hefelt a cold touch of dread. He knew that he should think of Lillian and findthe answer to the riddle of her character, because this was a revelationwhich he could not ignore; but he did not think of her—and he felt the dreadbecause he knew that the answer had ceased to matter to him long ago.

The flood of weariness was starting to rise again. He felt as if he couldalmost see it in thickening waves; it was not within him, but outside,spreading through the room. For an instant, he felt as if he were alone, lost

in a gray desert, needing help and knowing that no help would come, Hestopped short. In the lighted doorway, the length of the room between them,he saw the tall, arrogant figure of a man who had paused for a moment beforeentering. He had never met the man, but of all the notorious faces thatcluttered the pages of newspapers, this was the one he despised. It wasFrancisco d'Anconia.

Rearden had never given much thought to men like Bertram Scudder.

But with every hour of his life, with the strain and the pride of everymoment when his muscles or his mind had ached from effort, with every step hehad taken to rise out of the mines of Minnesota and to turn his effort intogold, with all of his profound respect for money and for its meaning, hedespised the squanderer who did not know how to deserve the great gift ofinherited wealth. There, he thought, was the most contemptible representativeof the species.

He saw Francisco d'Anconia enter, bow to Lillian, then walk into the crowdas if he owned the room which he had never entered before.

Heads turned to watch him, as if he pulled them on strings in his wake.

Approaching Lillian once more, Rearden said without anger, the contemptbecoming amusement in his voice, "I didn't know you knew that one."

"I've met him at a few parties."

"Is he one of your friends, too?"

"Certainly not!" The sharp resentment was genuine."Then why did you invite him?"

"Well, you can't give a party—not a party that counts—while he's in thiscountry, without inviting him. It's a nuisance if he comes, and a socialblack mark if he doesn't."

Rearden laughed. She was off guard; she did not usually admit things ofthis kind. "Look," he said wearily, "I don't want to spoil your party. Butkeep that man away from me. Don't come around with introductions. I don'twant to meet him. I don't know how you'll work that, but you're an experthostess, so work it."

Dagny stood still when she saw Francisco approaching. He bowed to her ashe passed by. He did not stop, but she knew that he had stopped the moment inhis mind. She saw him smile faintly in deliberate emphasis of what heunderstood and did not choose to acknowledge. She turned away. She hoped toavoid him for the rest of the evening.

Balph Eubank had joined the group around Dr. Pritchett, and was sayingsullenly, ". . . no, you cannot expect people to understand the higherreaches of philosophy. Culture should be taken out of the hands of thedollar-chasers. We need a national subsidy for literature. It is disgracefulthat artists are treated like peddlers and that art works have to be soldlike soap."

"You mean, your complaint is that they don't sell like soap?" askedFrancisco d'Anconia.

They had not noticed him approach; the conversation stopped, as if slashedoff; most of them had never met him, but they all recognized him at once.

"I meant—" Balph Eubank started angrily and closed his mouth; he saw theeager interest on the faces of his audience, but it was not interest inphilosophy any longer.

"Why, hello, Professor!" said Francisco, bowing to Dr. Pritchett.

There was no pleasure in Dr. Pritchett's face when he answered thegreeting and performed a few introductions.

"We were just discussing a most interesting subject," said the earnestmatron. "Dr. Pritchett was telling us that nothing is anything."

"He should, undoubtedly, know more than anyone else about that,"

Francisco answered gravely.

"I wouldn't have supposed that you knew Dr. Pritchett so well, Senord'Anconia," she said, and wondered why the professor looked displeased by herremark.

"I am an alumnus of the great school that employs Dr. Pritchett atpresent, the Patrick Henry University. But I studied under one of hispredecessors—Hugh Akston."

"Hugh Akston!" the attractive young woman gasped. "But you couldn't have,Senor d'Anconia! You're not old enough. I thought he was one of those greatnames of ... of the last century."

"Perhaps in spirit, madame. Not in fact."

"But I thought he died years ago."

"Why, no. He is still alive."

"Then why don't we ever hear about him any more?""He retired, nine years ago."

"Isn't it odd? When a politician or a movie star retires, we read frontpage stories about it. But when a philosopher retires, people do not evennotice it."

"They do, eventually."

A young man said, astonished, "I thought Hugh Akston was one of thoseclassics that nobody studied any more, except in histories of philosophy. Iread an article recently which referred to him as the last of the greatadvocates of reason."

"Just what did Hugh Akston teach?" asked the earnest matron.

Francisco answered, "He taught that everything is something."

"Your loyalty to your teacher is laudable, Senior d'Anconia," said Dr.

Pritchett dryly. "May we take it that you are an example of the practicalresults of his teaching?"

"I am."

James Taggart had approached the group and was waiting to be noticed."Hello, Francisco.""Good evening, James."

"What a wonderful coincidence, seeing you here! I've been very anxious tospeak to you."

"That's new. You haven't always been."

"Now you're joking, just like in the old days." Taggart was moving slowly,as if casually, away from the group, hoping to draw Francisco after him. "Youknow that there's not a person in this room who wouldn't love to talk toyou. "

"Really? I'd be inclined to suspect the opposite." Francisco had followedobediently, but stopped within hearing distance of the others.

"I have tried in every possible way to get in touch with you," saidTaggart, "but . . . but circumstances didn't permit me to succeed."

"Are you trying to hide from me the fact that I refused to see you?"

"Well . . . that is . , .1 mean, why did you refuse?"

"I couldn't imagine what you wanted to speak to me about."

"The San Sebastian Mines, of course!" Taggart's voice rose a little.

"Why, what about them?"

"But . . . Now, look, Francisco, this is serious. It's a disaster, anunprecedented disaster—and nobody can make any sense out of it. I don't knowwhat to think. I don't understand it at all. I have a right to know."

"A right? Aren't you being old-fashioned, James? But what is it you wantto know?"

"Well, first of all, that nationalization—what are you going to do aboutit?"

"Nothing.""Nothing?!"

"But surely you don't want me to do anything about it. My mines and yourrailroad were seized by the will of the people. You wouldn't want me tooppose the will of the people, would you?"

"Francisco, this is not a laughing matter!"

"I never thought it was."

"I'm entitled to an explanation! You owe your stockholders an account ofthe whole disgraceful affair! Why did you pick a worthless mine? Why did youwaste all those millions? What sort of rotten swindle was It?"

Francisco stood looking at him in polite astonishment. "Why, James,"

he said, "I thought you would approve of it."

"Approve?!"

"I thought you would consider the San Sebastian Mines as the practicalrealization of an ideal of the highest moral order. Remembering that you andI have disagreed so often in the past, I thought you would be gratified tosee me acting in accordance with your principles."

"What are you talking about?"

Francisco shook his head regretfully. "I don't know why you should call mybehavior rotten. I thought you would recognize it as an honest effort topractice what the whole world is preaching. Doesn't everyone believe that itis evil to be selfish? I was totally selfless in regard to the San Sebastianproject. Isn't it evil to pursue a personal interest? I had no personalinterest in it whatever. Isn't it evil to work for profit? I did not work forprofit—I took a loss. Doesn't everyone agree that the purpose andjustification of an industrial enterprise are not production, but thelivelihood of its employees? The San Sebastian Mines were the most eminentlysuccessful venture in industrial history: they produced no copper, but theyprovided a livelihood for thousands of men who could not have achieved, in alifetime, the equivalent of what they got for one day's work, which theycould not do. Isn't it generally agreed that an owner is a parasite and anexploiter, that it is the employees who do all the work and make the productpossible? I did not exploit anyone. I did not burden the San Sebastian Mineswith my useless presence; I left them in the hands of the men who count. Idid not pass judgment on the value of that property. I turned it over to amining specialist. He was not a very good specialist, but he needed the jobvery badly. Isn't it generally conceded that when you hire a man for a job,it is his need that counts, not his ability? Doesn't everyone believe that inorder to get the goods, all you have to do is need them? I have carried outevery moral precept of our age. I expected gratitude and a citation of honor.I do not understand why I am being damned."

In the silence of those who had listened, the sole comment was the shrill,sudden giggle of Betty Pope: she had understood nothing, but she saw the lookof helpless fury on James Taggart's face.

People were looking at Taggart, expecting an answer. They were indifferentto the issue, they were merely amused by the spectacle of someone'sembarrassment. Taggart achieved a patronizing smile.

"You don't expect me to take this seriously?" he asked.

"There was a time," Francisco answered, "when I did not believe thatanyone could take it seriously. I was wrong."

"This is outrageous!" Taggart's voice started to rise. "It's perfectlyoutrageous to treat your public responsibilities with such thoughtlesslevity!" He turned to hurry away.

Francisco shrugged, spreading his hands. "You see? I didn't think youwanted to speak to me."

Rearden stood alone, far at the other end of the room. Philip noticed him,approached and waved to Lillian, calling her over.

"Lillian, I don't think that Henry is having a good time," he said,smiling; one could not tell whether the mockery of his smile was directed atLillian or at Rearden. "Can't we do something about it?"

"Oh, nonsense!" said Rearden.

"I wish I knew what to do about it, Philip," said Lillian. "I've alwayswished Henry would learn to relax. He's so grimly serious about everything.He's such a rigid Puritan. I've always wanted to see him drunk, just once.But I've given up. What would you suggest?"

"Oh, I don't know! But he shouldn't be standing around all by himself."

"Drop it," said Rearden. While thinking dimly that he did not want to hurttheir feelings, he could not prevent himself from adding, "You don't know howhard I've tried to be left standing all by myself."

"There—you see?" Lillian smiled at Philip. "To enjoy life and people isnot so simple as pouring a ton of steel. Intellectual pursuits are notlearned in the market place."

Philip chuckled. "It's not intellectual pursuits I'm worried about.

How sure are you about that Puritan stuff, Lillian? If I were you, Iwouldn't leave him free to look around. There are too many beautiful womenhere tonight."

"Henry entertaining thoughts of infidelity? You flatter him, Philip.You overestimate his courage." She smiled at Rearden, coldly, for a brief,stressed moment, then moved away.

Rearden looked at his brother. "What in hell do you think you're doing?""Oh, stop playing the Puritan! Can't you take a joke?"

Moving aimlessly through the crowd, Dagny wondered why she had acceptedthe invitation to this party. The answer astonished her: it was because shehad wanted to see Hank Rearden. Watching him in the crowd, she realized thecontrast for the first time. The faces of the others looked like aggregatesof interchangeable features, every face oozing to blend into the anonymity ofresembling all, and all looking as if they were melting. Rearden's face, withthe sharp planes, the pale blue eyes, the ash-blond hair, had the firmness ofice; the uncompromising clarity of its lines made it look, among the others,as if he were moving through a fog, hit by a ray of light.

Her eyes kept returning to him involuntarily. She never caught himglancing in her direction. She could not believe that he was avoiding herintentionally; there could be no possible reason for it- yet she felt certainthat he was. She wanted to approach him and convince herself that she wasmistaken. Something stopped her; she could not understand her own reluctance.

Rearden bore patiently a conversation with his mother and two ladies whomshe wished him to entertain with stories of his youth and his struggle. Hecomplied, telling himself that she was proud of him in her own way. But hefelt as if something in her manner kept suggesting that she had nursed himthrough his struggle and that she was the source of his success. He was gladwhen she let him go. Then he escaped once more to the recess of the window.

He stood there for a while, leaning on a sense of privacy as if it were aphysical support.

"Mr. Rearden," said a strangely quiet voice beside him, "permit me tointroduce myself. My name is d'Anconia."

Rearden turned, startled; d'Anconia's manner and voice had a quality hehad seldom encountered before: a tone of authentic respect.

"How do you do," he answered. His voice was brusque and dry; but he hadanswered.

"I have observed that Mrs. Rearden has been trying to avoid the necessityof presenting me to you, and I can guess the reason. Would you prefer that Ileave your house?"

The action of naming an issue instead of evading it, was so unlike theusual behavior of all the men he knew, it was such a sudden, startling

relief, that Rearden remained silent for a moment, studying d'Anconia's face.Francisco had said it very simply, neither as a reproach nor a plea, but in amanner which, strangely, acknowledged Rearden's dignity and his own.

"No," said Rearden, "whatever else you guessed, I did not say that."

"Thank you. In that case, you will allow me to speak to you."

"Why should you wish to speak to me?"

"My motives cannot interest you at present."

"Mine is not the sort of conversation that could interest you at all."

"You are mistaken about one of us, Mr. Rearden, or both. I came to thisparty solely in order to meet you."

There had been a faint tone of amusement in Rearden's voice; now ithardened into a hint of contempt. "You started by playing it straight.

Stick to it."

"I am."

"What did you want to meet me for? In order to make me lose money?"Francisco looked straight at him. "Yes—eventually.""What is it, this time? A gold mine?"

Francisco shook his head slowly; the conscious deliberation of themovement gave it an air that was almost sadness. "No," he said, "I don't wantto sell you anything. As a matter of fact, I did not attempt to sell thecopper mine to James Taggart, either. He came to me for it. You won't."

Rearden chuckled. "If you understand that much, we have at least asensible basis for conversation. Proceed on that. If you don't have somefancy investment in mind, what did you want to meet me for?"

"In order to become acquainted with you,"

"That's not an answer. It's just another way of saying the same thing.""Not quite, Mr. Rearden."

"Unless you mean—in order to gain my confidence?"

"No. I don't like people who speak or think in terms of gaining anybody'sconfidence. If one's actions are honest, one does not need the predatedconfidence of others, only their rational perception. The person who craves amoral blank check of that kind, has dishonest intentions, whether he admitsit to himself or not."

Rearden's startled glance at him was like the involuntary thrust of a handgrasping for support in a desperate need. The glance betrayed how much hewanted to find the sort of man he thought he was seeing. Then Rearden loweredhis eyes, almost closing them, slowly, shutting out the vision and the need.His face was hard; it had an expression of severity, an inner severitydirected at himself; it looked austere and lonely.

"All right," he said tonelessly. "What do you want, if it's not myconfidence?"

"I want to learn to understand you."

"What for?"

"For a reason of my own which need not concern you at present.""What do you want to understand about me?"

Francisco looked silently out at the darkness. The fire of the mills wasdying down. There was only a faint tinge of red left on the edge of theearth, just enough to outline the scraps of clouds ripped by the torturedbattle of the storm in the sky. Dim shapes kept sweeping through space andvanishing, shapes which were branches, but looked as if they were the fury ofthe wind made visible.

"It's a terrible night for any animal caught unprotected on that plain,"said Francisco d'Anconia. "This is when one should appreciate the meaningof being a man."

Rearden did not answer for a moment; then he said, as if in answer tohimself, a tone of wonder in his voice, "Funny . . .""What?"

"You told me what I was thinking just a while ago . . .""You were?"

". . . only I didn't have the words for it,""Shall I tell you the rest of the words?""Go ahead."

"You stood here and watched the storm _with the greatest pride one canever feel—because you are able to have summer flowers and half naked women inyour house on a night like this, in demonstration of your victory over thatstorm. And if it weren't for you, most of those who are here would be lefthelpless at the mercy of that wind in the middle of some such plain."

"How did you know that?"

In tune with his question., Rearden realized that it was not his thoughtsthis man had named, but his most hidden, most persona]

emotion; and that he, who would never confess his emotions to anyone, hadconfessed it in his question. He saw the faintest flicker in Francisco'seyes, as of a smile or a check mark.

"What would you know about a pride of that kind?" Rearden asked sharply,as if the contempt of the second question could erase the confidence of thefirst.

"That is what I felt once, when I was young."

Rearden looked at him. There was neither mockery nor self-pity inFrancisco's face; the fine, sculptured planes and the clear, blue eyes held aquiet composure, the face was open, offered to any blow, unflinching.

"Why do you want to talk about it?" Rearden asked, prompted by a moment'sreluctant compassion.

"Let us say—by way of gratitude, Mr. Rearden."

"Gratitude to me?"

"If you will accept it."

Rearden's voice hardened. "I haven't asked for gratitude. I don't needit. "

"I have not said you needed it. But of all those whom you are saving fromthe storm tonight, I am the only one who will offer it."

After a moment's silence, Rearden asked, his voice low with a sound whichwas almost a threat, "What are you trying to do?"

"I am calling your attention to the nature of those for whom you areworking."

"It would take a man who's never done an honest day's work in his life, tothink or say that." The contempt in Rearden's voice had a note of relief; hehad been disarmed by a doubt of his judgment on the character of hisadversary; now he felt certain once more. "You wouldn't understand it if Itold you that the man who works, works for himself, even if he does carry thewhole wretched bunch of you along. Now I'll guess what you're thinking: goahead, say that it's evil, that I'm selfish, conceited, heartless, cruel. Iam. I don't want any part of that tripe about working for others. I'm not."

For the first time, he saw the look of a personal reaction in Francisco'seyes, the look of something eager and young. "The only thing that's wrong inwhat you said, " Francisco answered, "is that you permit anyone to call itevil." In Rearden's pause of incredulous silence, he pointed at the crowd inthe drawing room. "Why are you willing to carry them?"

"Because they're a bunch of miserable children who struggle to remainalive, desperately and very badly, while I—I don't even notice the burden,"

"Why don't you tell them that?"

"What?"

"That you're working for your own sake, not theirs.""They know it."

"Oh yes, they know it. Every single one of them here knows it. But theydon't think you do. And the aim of all their efforts is to keep you fromknowing it."

"Why should I care what they think?"

"Because it's a battle in which one must make one's stand clear.""A battle? What battle? I hold the whip hand. I don't fight the disarmed.""Are they? They have a weapon against you. It's their only weapon, butit's a terrible one. Ask yourself what it is, some time.""Where do you see any evidence of it?"

"In the unforgivable fact that you're as unhappy as you are."

Rearden could accept any form of reproach, abuse, damnation anyone choseto throw at him; the only human reaction which he would not accept was pity.The stab of a coldly rebellious anger brought him back to the full context ofthe moment. He spoke, fighting not to acknowledge the nature of the emotionrising within him, "What sort of effrontery are you indulging in? What's yourmotive?"

"Let us say—to give you the words you need, for the time when you'll needthem."

"Why should you want to speak to me on such a subject?""In the hope that you will remember it."

What he felt, thought Rearden, was anger at the incomprehensible fact thathe had allowed himself to enjoy this conversation. He felt a dim sense ofbetrayal, the hint of an unknown danger. "Do you expect me to forget what youare?" he asked, knowing that this was what he had forgotten.

"I do not expect you to think of me at all."

Under his anger, the emotion which Rearden would not acknowledge remainedunstated and unthought; he knew it only as a hint of pain.

Had he faced it, he would have known that he still heard Francisco's voicesaying, "I am the only one who will offer it ... if you will accept it. . .." He heard the words and the strangely solemn inflection of the quiet voiceand an inexplicable answer of his own, something within him that wanted tocry yes, to accept, to tell this man that he accepted, that he needed it—though there was no name for what he needed, it was not gratitude, and heknew that it was not gratitude this man had meant.

Aloud, he said, "I didn't seek to talk to you. But you've asked for it andyou're going to hear it. To me, there's only one form of human depravity—theman without a purpose."

"That is true."

"I can forgive all those others, they're not vicious, they're merelyhelpless. But you—you're the kind who can't be forgiven."

"It is against the sin of forgiveness that I wanted to warn you."

"You had the greatest chance in life. What have you done with it?

If you have the mind to understand all the things you said, how can youspeak to me at all? How can you face anyone after the sort of irresponsibledestruction you've perpetrated in that Mexican business?"

"It is your right to condemn me for it, if you wish."

Dagny stood by the corner of the window recess, listening. They did notnotice her. She had seen them together and she had approached, drawn by animpulse she could not explain or resist; it seemed crucially important thatshe know what these two men said to each other.

She had heard their last few sentences. She had never thought it possiblethat she would see Francisco taking a beating. He could smash any adversaryin any form of encounter. Yet he stood, offering no defense.

She knew that it was not indifference; she knew his face well enough tosee the effort his calm cost him—she saw the faint line of a muscle pulledtight across his cheek.

"Of all those who live by the ability of others," said Rearden, "you'rethe one real parasite."

"I have given you grounds to think so."

"Then what right have you to talk about the meaning of being a man? You'rethe one who has betrayed it."

"I am sorry if I have offended you by what you may rightly consider as apresumption."

Francisco bowed and turned to go. Rearden said involuntarily, not knowingthat the question negated his anger, that it was a plea to stop this man andhold him, "What did you want to learn to understand about me?"

Francisco turned. The expression of his face had not changed; it was stilla look of gravely courteous respect. "I have learned it," he answered.

Rearden stood watching him as he walked off into the crowd. The figures ofa butler, with a crystal dish, and of Dr. Pritchett, stooping to chooseanother canape, hid Francisco from sight. Rearden glanced out at thedarkness; nothing could be seen there but the wind.

Dagny stepped forward, when he came out of the recess; she smiled, openlyinviting conversation. He stopped. It seemed to her that he had stoppedreluctantly. She spoke hastily, to break the silence.

"Hank, why do you have so many intellectuals of the looter persuasionhere? I wouldn't have them in my house."

This was not what she had wanted to say to him. But she did not know whatshe wanted to say; never before had she felt herself left wordless in hispresence.

She saw his eyes narrowing, like a door being closed. "I see no reason whyone should not invite them to a party," he answered coldly.

"Oh, I didn't mean to criticize your choice of guests. But . . . Well,I've been trying not to learn which one of them is Bertram Scudder. If I do,I'll slap his face." She tried to sound casual, "I don't want to create ascene, but I'm not sure I'll be able to control myself. I couldn't believe itwhen somebody told me that Mrs. Rearden had invited him."

"I invited him."

"But . . ." Then her voice dropped. "Why?"

"I don't attach any importance to occasions of this kind.""I'm sorry, Hank. I didn't know you were so tolerant. I'm not."He said nothing.

"I know you don't like parties. Neither do I. But sometimes I wonder . . .perhaps we're the only ones who were meant to be able to enjoy them.""I am afraid I have no talent for it."

"Not for this. But do you think any of these people are enjoying it?They're just straining to be more senseless and aimless than usual. To belight and unimportant . . . You know, I think that only if one feelsimmensely important can one feel truly light."

"I wouldn't know."

"It's just a thought that disturbs me once in a while. ... I thought itabout my first ball. ... I keep thinking that parties are intended to becelebrations, and celebrations should be only for those who have something tocelebrate."

"I have never thought of it."

She could not adapt her words to the rigid formality of his manner; shecould not quite believe it. They had always been at ease together, in hisoffice. Now he was like a man in a strait jacket.

"Hank, look at it. If you didn't know any of these people, wouldn't itseem beautiful? The lights and the clothes and all the imagination that wentto make it possible . . ." She was looking at the room. She did not noticethat he had not followed her glance. He was looking down at the shadows onher naked shoulder, the soft, blue shadows made by the light that fell

through the strands of her hair. "Why have we left it all to fools? It shouldhave been ours."

"In what manner?"

"I don't know . . . I've always expected parties to be exciting andbrilliant, like some rare drink." She laughed; there was a note of sadness init. "But I don't drink, either. That's just another symbol that doesn't meanwhat it was intended to mean," He was silent. She added, "Perhaps there'ssomething that we have missed."

"I am not aware of it."

In a flash of sudden, desolate emptiness, she was glad that he had notunderstood or responded, feeling dimly that she had revealed too much, yetnot knowing what she had revealed. She shrugged, the movement running throughthe curve of her shoulder like a faint convulsion.

"It's just an old illusion of mine," she said indifferently. "Just a moodthat comes once every year or two. Let me see the latest steel price indexand I'll forget all about it."

She did not know that his eyes were following her, as she walked away fromhim.

She moved slowly through the room, looking at no one. She noticed a smallgroup huddled by the unlighted fireplace. The room was not cold, but they satas if they drew comfort from the thought of a non-existent fire.

"I do not know why, but I am growing to be afraid of the dark. No, notnow, only when I am alone. What frightens me is night. Night as such."

The speaker was an elderly spinster with an air of breeding andhopelessness. The three women and two men of the group were well dressed, theskin of their faces was smoothly well tended, but they had a manner ofanxious caution that kept their voices one tone lower than normal and blurredthe differences of their ages, giving them all the same gray look of beingspent. It was the look one saw in groups of respectable people everywhere.Dagny stopped and listened.

"But, my dear," one of them asked, "why should it frighten you?"

"I don't know," said the spinster, "I am not afraid of prowlers orrobberies or anything of the sort. But I stay awake all night. I fall asleeponly when I see the sky turning pale. It is very odd. Every evening, when itgrows dark, I get the feeling that this tune it is final, that daylight willnot return."

"My cousin who lives on the coast of Maine wrote me the same thing,"said one of the women.

"Last night," said the spinster, "I stayed awake because of the shooting.There were guns going off all night, way out at sea. There were no flashes.There was nothing. Just those detonations, at long intervals, somewhere inthe fog over the Atlantic."

"I read something about it in the paper this morning. Coast Guard targetpractice."

"Why, no," the spinster said indifferently. "Everybody down on the shoreknows what it was. It was Ragnar Danneskjold. It was the Coast Guard tryingto catch him."

"Ragnar Danneskjold in Delaware Bay?" a woman gasped.

"Oh, yes. They say it is not the first time."

"Did they catch him?"

"No. "

"Nobody can catch him," said one of the men.

"The People's State of Norway has offered a million-dollar reward for hishead."

"That's an awful lot of money to pay for a pirate's head.""But how are we going to have any order or security or planning in theworld, with a pirate running loose all over the seven seas?"

"Do you know what it was that he seized last night?" said the spinster."The big ship with the relief supplies we were sending to the People'sState of France."

"How does he dispose of the goods he seizes?""Ah, that—nobody knows."

"I met a sailor once, from a ship he'd attacked, who'd seen him in person.He said that Ragnar Danneskjold has the purest gold hair and the mostfrightening face on earth, a face with no sign of any feeling. If there everwas a man born without a heart, he's it—the sailor said."

"A nephew of mine saw Ragnar Danneskjold's ship one night, off the coastof Scotland. He wrote me that he couldn't believe his eyes. It was a bettership than any in the navy of the People's State of England."

"They say he hides in one of those Norwegian fjords where neither God norman will ever find him. That's where the Vikings used to hide in the MiddleAges."

"There's a reward on his head offered by the People's State of Portugal,too. And by the People's State of Turkey."

"They say it's a national scandal in Norway. He comes from one of theirbest families. The family lost its money generations ago, but the name is ofthe noblest. The ruins of their castle are still in existence.

His father is a bishop. His father has disowned him and excommunicatedhim. But it had no effect."

"Did you know that Ragnar Danneskjold went to school in this country?Sure. The Patrick Henry University."

"Not really?"

"Oh yes. You can look it up."

"What bothers me is . . . You know, I don't like it. I don't like it thathe's now appearing right here, in our own waters. I thought things like thatcould happen only in the wastelands. Only in Europe. But a big-scale outlawof that kind operating in Delaware in our day and age!"

"He's been seen off Nantucket, too. And at Bar Harbor. The newspapers havebeen asked not to write about it."

"Why?"

"They don't want people to know that the navy can't cope with him.""I don't like it. It feels funny. It's like something out of the DarkAges."

Dagny glanced up. She saw Francisco d'Anconia standing a few steps away.He was looking at her with a kind of stressed curiosity; his eyes weremocking.

"It's a strange world we're living in," said the spinster, her voice low.

"I read an article," said one of the women tonelessly. "It said that timesof trouble are good for us. It is good that people are growing poorer. Toaccept privations is a moral virtue."

"I suppose so," said another, without conviction.

"We must not worry. I heard a speech that said it is useless to worry orto blame anyone. Nobody can help what he does, that is the way things madehim. There is nothing we can do about anything. We must learn to bear it."

"What's the use anyway? What is man's fate? Hasn't it always been to hope,but never to achieve? The wise man is the one- who does not attempt to hope."

"That is the right attitude to take."

"I don't know ... I don't know what is right any more . . . How can weever know?"

"Oh well, who is John Gait?"

Dagny turned brusquely and started away from them. One of the womenfollowed her.

"But I do know it," said the woman, in the soft, mysterious tone ofsharing a secret.

"You know what?"

"I know who is John Gait."

"Who?" Dagny asked tensely, stopping.

"I know a man who knew John Gait in person. This man is an old friend of agreat-aunt of mine. He was there and he saw it happen. Do you know the legendof Atlantis, Miss Taggart?"

"What?"

"Atlantis . "

"Why . . . vaguely."

"The Isles of the Blessed. That is what the Greeks called it, thousands ofyears ago. They said Atlantis was a place where hero-spirits lived in ahappiness unknown to the rest of the earth. A place which only the spirits ofheroes could enter, and they reached it without dying, because they carriedthe secret of life within them. Atlantis was lost to mankind, even then. Butthe Greeks knew that it had existed. They tried to find it. Some of them saidit was underground, hidden in the heart of the earth. But most of them saidit was an island. A radiant island in the Western Ocean. Perhaps what theywere thinking of was America. They never found it. For centuries afterward,men said it was only a legend.

They did not believe it, but they never stopped looking for it, becausethey knew that that was what they had to find."

"Well, what about John Gait?"

"He found it."

Dagny's interest was gone. "Who was he?"

"John Gait was a millionaire, a man of inestimable wealth. He was sailinghis yacht one night, in mid-Atlantic, fighting the worst storm ever wreakedupon the world, when he found it. He saw it in the depth, where it had sunkto escape the reach of men. He saw the towers of Atlantis shining on thebottom of the ocean. It was a sight of such kind that when one had seen it,one could no longer wish to look at the rest of the earth. John Gait sank hisship and went down with his entire crew. They all chose to do it. My friendwas the only one who survived."

"How interesting."

"My friend saw it with his own eyes," said the woman, offended. "Ithappened many years ago. But John Gait's family hushed up the story."

"And what happened to his fortune? [ don't recall ever hearing of a Gaitfortune."

"It went down with him." She added belligerently, "You don't have tobelieve it."

"Miss Taggart doesn't," said Francisco d'Anconia. "I do."

They turned. He had followed them and he stood looking at them with theinsolence of exaggerated earnestness.

"Have you ever had faith in anything, Senor d'Anconia?" the woman askedangrily.

"No, madame."

He chuckled at her brusque departure. Dagny asked coldly, "What's thejoke?"

"The joke's on that fool woman. She doesn't know that she was telling youthe truth."

"Do you expect me to believe that?""No. "

"Then what do you find so amusing?"

"Oh, a great many things here. Don't you?"

"No. "

"Well, that's one of the things I find amusing.""Francisco, will you leave me alone?"

"But I have. Didn't you notice that you were first to speak to metonight?"

"Why do you keep watching me?""Curiosity. ""About what?"

"Your reaction to the things which you don't find amusing.""Why should you care about my reaction to anything?"

"That is my own way of having a good time, which, incidentally, you arenot having, are you, Dagny? Besides, you're the only woman worth watchinghere."

She stood defiantly still, because the way he looked at her demanded anangry escape. She stood as she always did, straight and taut, her head liftedimpatiently. It was the unfeminine pose of an executive. But her nakedshoulder betrayed the fragility of the body under the black dress, and thepose made her most truly a woman. The proud strength became a challenge tosomeone's superior strength, and the fragility a reminder that the challengecould be broken. She was not conscious of it. She had met no one able to seeit.

He said, looking down at her body, "Dagny, what a magnificent waste!"

She had to turn and escape. She felt herself blushing, for the first timein years: blushing because she knew suddenly that the sentence named what shehad felt all evening.

She ran, trying not to think. The music stopped her. It was a sudden blastfrom the radio. She noticed Mort Liddy, who had turned it on, waving his armsto a group of friends, yelling, "That's it! That's it! I want you to hearit! "

The great burst of sound was the opening chords of Halley's FourthConcerto. It rose in tortured triumph, speaking its denial of pain, its hymnto a distant vision. Then the notes broke. It was as if a handful of mud andpebbles had been flung at the music, and what followed was the sound of therolling and the dripping. It was Halley's Concerto swung into a popular tune.It was Halley's melody torn apart, its holes stuffed with hiccoughs. Thegreat statement of joy had become the giggling of a barroom. Yet it was stillthe remnant of Halley's melody that gave it form; it was the melody thatsupported it like a spinal cord.

"Pretty good?" Mort Liddy was smiling at his friends, boastfully andnervously. "Pretty good, eh? Best movie score of the year. Got me a prize.Got me a long-term contract. Yeah, this was my score for Heaven's in YourBackyard."

Dagny stood, staring at the room, as if one sense could replace another,as if sight could wipe out sound. She moved her head in a slow circle, tryingto find an anchor somewhere. She saw Francisco leaning against a column, hisarms crossed; he was looking straight at her; he was laughing.

Don't shake like this, she thought. Get out of here. This was the approachof an anger she could not control. She thought: Say nothing.

Walk steadily. Get out.

She had started walking, cautiously, very slowly. She heard Lillian'swords and stopped. Lillian had said it many times this evening, in answer tothe same question, but it was the first time that Dagny heard it.

"This?" Lillian was saying, extending her arm with the metal bracelet forthe inspection of two smartly groomed women. "Why, no, it's not from ahardware store, it's a very special gift from my husband.

Oh, yes, of course it's hideous. But don't you sec? It's supposed to bepriceless. Of course, I'd exchange it for a common diamond bracelet any time,but somehow nobody will offer me one for it, even though it is so very, veryvaluable. Why? My dear, it's the first thing ever made of Rearden Metal."

Dagny did not see the room. She did not hear the music. She felt thepressure of dead stillness against her eardrums. She did not know the momentthat preceded, or the moments that were to follow. She did not know thoseinvolved, neither herself, nor Lillian, nor Rearden, nor the meaning of herown action. It was a single instant, blasted out of context. She had heard.She was looking at the bracelet of green-blue metal.

She felt the movement of something being torn off her wrist, and she heardher own voice saying in the great stillness, very calmly, a voice cold as askeleton, naked of emotion, "If you are not the coward that I think you are,you will exchange it."

On the palm of her hand, she was extending her diamond bracelet toLillian.

"You're not serious, Miss Taggart?" said a woman's voice.

It was not Lillian's voice. Lillian's eyes were looking straight at her.

She saw them. Lillian knew that she was serious.

"Give me that bracelet," said Dagny, lifting her palm higher, the diamondband glittering across it.

"This is horrible!" cried some woman. It was strange that the cry stoodout so sharply. Then Dagny realized that there were people standing aroundthem and that they all stood in silence. She was hearing sounds now, even themusic; it was Halley's mangled Concerto, somewhere far away.

She saw Rearden's face. It looked as if something within him were mangled,like the music; she did not know by what. He was watching them.

Lillian's mouth moved into an upturned crescent. It resembled a smile. Shesnapped the metal bracelet open, dropped it on Dagny's palm and took thediamond band.

"Thank you, Miss Taggart," she said.

Dagny's fingers closed about the metal. She felt that; she felt nothingelse.

Lillian turned, because Rearden had approached her. He took the diamondbracelet from her hand. He clasped it on her wrist, raised her hand to hislips and kissed it.

He did not look at Dagny.

Lillian laughed, gaily, easily, attractively, bringing the room back toits normal mood.

"You may have it back, Miss Taggart, when you change your mind,"she said.

Dagny had turned away. She felt calm and free. The pressure was gone. Theneed to get out had vanished.

She clasped the metal bracelet on her wrist. She liked the feel of itsweight against her skin. Inexplicably, she felt a touch of feminine vanity,the kind she had never experienced before: the desire to be seen wearing thisparticular ornament.

From a distance, she heard snatches of indignant voices: "The mostoffensive gesture I've ever seen. ... It was vicious. . . .I'm gladLillian took her up on it. . . . Serves her right, if she feels like throwinga few thousand dollars away. ..."

For the rest of the evening, Rearden remained by the side of his wife.

He shared her conversations, he laughed with her friends, he was suddenlythe devoted, attentive, admiring husband.

He was crossing the room, carrying a tray with drinks requested by someonein Lillian's group—an unbecoming act of informality which nobody had everseen him perform—when Dagny approached him.

She stopped and looked up at him, as if they were alone in his office.

She stood like an executive, her head lifted. He looked down at her. Inthe line of his glance, from the fingertips of her one hand to her face, herbody was naked but for his metal bracelet.

"I'm sorry, Hank," she said, "but I had to do it."

His eyes remained expressionless. Yet she was suddenly certain that sheknew what he felt: he wanted to slap her face.

"It was not necessary," he answered coldly, and walked on.

It was very late when Rearden entered his wife's bedroom. She was stillawake. A lamp burned on her bedside table.

She lay in bed, propped up on pillows of pale green linen. Her bed jacketwas pale green satin, worn with the untouched perfection of a window model;its lustrous folds looked as if the crinkle of tissue paper still lingeredamong them. The light, shaded to a tone of apple blossoms, fell on a tablethat held a book, a glass of fruit juice, and toilet accessories of silverglittering like instruments in a surgeon's case. Her arms had a tinge ofporcelain. There was a touch of pale pink lipstick on her mouth. She showedno sign of exhaustion after the party—no sign of life to be exhausted. Theplace was a decorator's display of a lady groomed for sleep, not to bedisturbed.

He still wore his dress clothes; his tie was loose, and a strand of hairhung over his face. She glanced at him without astonishment, as if she knewwhat the last hour in his room had done to him.

He looked at her silently. He had not entered her room for a long time. Hestood, wishing he had not entered it now.

"Isn't it customary to talk, Henry?"

"If you wish."

"I wish you'd send one of your brilliant experts from the mills to take alook at our furnace. Do you know that it went out during the party and Simonshad a terrible time getting it started again? . . . Mrs.

Weston says that our best achievement is our cook—she loved the horsd'oeuvres. . . . Balph Eubank said a very funny thing about you, he saidyou're a crusader with a factory's chimney smoke for a plume. . . .

I'm glad you don't like Francisco d'Anconia. I can't stand him."

He did not care to explain his presence, or to disguise defeat, or toadmit it by leaving. Suddenly, it did not matter to him what she guessed orfelt. He walked to the window and stood, looking out.

Why had she married him?—he thought. It was a question he had not askedhimself on their wedding day, eight years ago. Since then, in torturedloneliness, he had asked it many times. He had found no answer.

It was not for position, he thought, or for money. She came from an oldfamily that had both. Her family's name was not among the most distinguishedand their fortune was modest, but both were sufficient to let her be includedin the top circles of New York's society, where he had met her. Nine yearsago, he had appeared in New York like an explosion, in the glare of thesuccess of Rearden Steel, a success that had been thought impossible by thecity's experts. It was his indifference that made him spectacular. He did notknow that he was expected to attempt to buy his way into society and thatthey anticipated the pleasure of rejecting him. He had no time to noticetheir disappointment.

He attended, reluctantly, a few social occasions to which he was invitedby men who sought his favor. He did not know, but they knew, that hiscourteous politeness was condescension toward the people who had expected tosnub him, the people who had said that the age of achievement was past.

It was Lillian's austerity that attracted him—the conflict between herausterity and her behavior. He had never liked anyone or expected to beliked. He found himself held by the spectacle of a woman who was obviouslypursuing him but with obvious reluctance, as if against her own will, as iffighting a desire she resented. It was she who planned that they should meet,then faced him coldly, as if not caring that he knew it. She spoke little;she had an air of mystery that seemed to tell him he would never break

through her proud detachment, and an air of amusement, mocking her own desireand his.

He had not known many women. He had moved toward his goal, sweeping asideeverything that did not pertain to it in the world and in himself. Hisdedication to his work was like one of the fires he dealt with, a fire thatburned every lesser element, every impurity out of the white stream of asingle metal. He was incapable of halfway concerns.

But there were times when he felt a sudden access of desire, so violentthat it could not be given to a casual encounter. He had surrendered to it,on a few rare occasions through the years, with women he had thought heliked. He had been left feeling an angry emptiness—because he had sought anact of triumph, though he had not known of what nature, but the response hereceived was only a woman's acceptance of a casual pleasure, and he knew tooclearly that what he had won had no meaning. He was left, not with a sense ofattainment, but with a sense of his own degradation. He grew to hate hisdesire. He fought it. He came to believe the doctrine that this desire waswholly physical, a desire, not of consciousness, but of matter, and herebelled against the thought that his flesh could be free to choose and thatits choice was impervious to the will of his mind. He had spent his life inmines and mills, shaping matter to his wishes by the power of his brain—andhe found it intolerable that he should be unable to control the matter of hisown body. He fought it. He had won his every battle against inanimate nature;but this was a battle he lost.

It was the difficulty of the conquest that made him want Lillian.

She seemed to be a woman who expected and deserved a pedestal; this madehim want to drag her down to his bed. To drag her down, were the words in hismind; they gave him a dark pleasure, the sense of a victory worth winning.

He could not understand why—he thought it was an obscene conflict, thesign of some secret depravity within him—why he felt, at the same time, aprofound pride at the thought of granting to a woman the title of his wife.The feeling was solemn and shining; it was almost as if he felt that hewished to honor a woman by the act of possessing her.

Lillian seemed to fit the image he had not known he held, had not known hewished to find; he saw the grace, the pride, the purity; the rest was inhimself; he did not know that he was looking at a reflection.

He remembered the day when Lillian came from New York to his office, ofher own sudden choice, and asked him to take her through his mills. He hearda soft, low, breathless tone—the tone of admiration-growing in her voice, as she questioned him about his work and looked atthe place around her. He looked at her graceful figure moving against thebursts of furnace flame, and at the light, swift steps of her high heelsstumbling through drifts of slag, as she walked resolutely by his side.

The look in her eyes, when she watched a heat of steel being poured, waslike his own feeling for it made visible to him. When her eyes moved up tohis face, he saw the same look, but intensified to a degree that seemed tomake her helpless and silent. It was at dinner, that evening, that he askedher to marry him.

It took him some time after his marriage before he admitted to himselfthat this was torture. He still remembered the night when he admitted it,when he told himself—the veins of his wrists pulled tight as he stood by thebed, looking down at Lillian—that he deserved the torture and that he wouldendure it. Lillian was not looking at him; she was adjusting her hair. "May Igo to sleep now?" she asked.

She had never objected; she had never refused him anything; she submittedwhenever he wished. She submitted in the manner of complying with the rulethat it was, at times, her duty to become an inanimate object turned over toher husband's use.

She did not censure him. She made it clear that she took it for grantedthat men had degrading instincts which constituted the secret, ugly part ofmarriage. She was condescendingly tolerant. She smiled, in amused distaste,at the intensity of what he experienced. "It's the most undignified pastime Iknow of," she said to him once, "but I have never entertained the illusionthat men are superior to animals."

His desire for her had died in the first week of their marriage. Whatremained was only a need which he was unable to destroy. He had never entereda whorehouse; he thought, at times, that the self-loathing he wouldexperience there could be no worse than what he felt when he was driven toenter his wife's bedroom.

He would often find her reading a book. She would put it aside, with awhite ribbon to mark the pages. When lie lay exhausted, his eyes closed,still breathing in gasps, she would turn on the light, pick up the book andcontinue her reading.

He told himself that he deserved the torture, because he had wished neverto touch her again and was unable to maintain his decision. He despisedhimself for that. He despised a need which now held no shred of joy ormeaning, which had become the mere need of a woman's body, an anonymous bodythat belonged to a woman whom he had to forget while he held it. He becameconvinced that the need was depravity.

He did not condemn Lillian. He felt a dreary, indifferent respect for her.His hatred of his own desire had made him accept the doctrine that women werepure and that a pure woman was one incapable of physical pleasure.

Through the quiet agony of the years of his marriage, there had been onethought which he would not permit himself to consider; the thought ofinfidelity. He had given his word. He intended to keep it. It was not loyaltyto Lillian; it was not the person of Lillian that he wished to protect fromdishonor—but the person of his wife.

He thought of that now, standing at the window. He had not wanted to enterher room. He had fought against it. He had fought, more fiercely, againstknowing the particular reason why he would not be able to withstand ittonight. Then, seeing her, he had known suddenly that he would not touch her.The reason which had driven him here tonight was the reason which made itimpossible for him.

He stood still, feeling free of desire, feeling the bleak relief ofindifference to his body, to this room, even to his presence here. He hadturned away from her, not to see her lacquered chastity. What he thought heshould feel was respect; what he felt was revulsion.

". . . but Dr. Pritchett said that our culture is dying because ouruniversities have to depend on the alms of the meat packers, the steelpuddlers and the purveyors of breakfast cereals."

Why had she married him?—he thought. That bright, crisp voice was nottalking at random. She knew why he had come here. She knew what it would doto him to see her pick up a silver buffer and go on talking gaily, polishingher fingernails. She was talking about the party.

But she did not mention Bertram Scudder—or Dagny Taggart.

What had she sought in marrying him? He felt the presence of some cold,driving purpose within her—but found nothing to condemn. She had never triedto use him. She made no demands on him. She found no satisfaction in theprestige of industrial power—she spurned it—she preferred her own circle offriends. She was not after money—she spent little—she was indifferent to thekind of extravagance he could have afforded. He had no right to accuse her,he thought, or ever to break the bond. She was a woman of honor in theirmarriage. She wanted nothing material from him.

He turned and looked at her wearily.

"Next time you give a party," he said, "stick to your own crowd.

Don't invite what you think are my friends. I don't care to meet themsocially."

She laughed, startled and pleased. "I don't blame you, darling," she said.He walked out, adding nothing else.

What did she want from him?—he thought. What was she after? In theuniverse as he knew it. There was no answer.

CHAPTER VIITHE EXPLOITERS AND THE EXPLOITED

The rails rose through the rocks to the oil derricks and the oil derricksrose to the sky. Dagny stood on the bridge, looking up at the crest of thehill where the sun hit a spot of metal on the top of the highest rigging.

It looked like a white torch lighted over the snow on the ridges of WyattOIL By spring, she thought, the track would meet the line growing toward itfrom Cheyenne. She let her eyes follow the green-blue rails that started fromthe derricks, came down, went across the bridge and past her. She turned herhead to follow them through the miles of clear air, as they went on in greatcurves hung on the sides of the mountains, far to the end of the new track,where a locomotive crane, like an arm of naked bones and nerves, movedtensely against the sky.

A tractor went past her, loaded with green-blue bolts. The sound of drillscame as a steady shudder from far below, where men swung on metal cables,cutting the straight stone drop of the canyon wall to reinforce the abutmentsof the bridge. Down the track, she could see men working, their arms stiffwith the tension of their muscles as they gripped the handles of electric tietampers.

"Muscles, Miss Taggart, " Ben Nealy, the contractor, had said to her,"muscles—that's all it takes to build anything in the world."

No contractor equal to McNamara seemed to exist anywhere. She had takenthe best she could find. No engineer on the Taggart staff could be trusted tosupervise the job; all of them were skeptical about the new metal. "Frankly,Miss Taggart," her chief engineer had said, "since it is an experiment thatnobody has ever attempted before, I do not think it's fair that it should bemy responsibility." 'It's mine," she had answered. He was a man in hisforties, who still preserved the breezy manner of the college from which hehad graduated. Once, Taggart Transcontinental had had a chief engineer, asilent, gray-haired, self educated man, who could not be matched on anyrailroad. He had resigned, five years ago.

She glanced down over the bridge. She was standing on a slender beam ofsteel above a gorge that had cracked the mountains to a depth of fifteenhundred feet. Far at the bottom, she could distinguish the dim outlines of adry river bed, of piled boulders, of trees contorted by centuries. Shewondered whether boulders, tree trunks and muscles could ever bridge thatcanyon. She wondered why she found herself thinking suddenly that cave-dwellers had lived naked on the bottom of that canyon for ages.

She looked up at the Wyatt oil fields. The track broke into sidings amongthe wells. She saw the small disks of switches dotted against the snow. Theywere metal switches, of the kind that were scattered in thousands, unnoticed,throughout the country—but these were sparkling in the sun and the sparkswere greenish-blue. What they meant to her was hour upon hour of speakingquietly, evenly, patiently, trying to hit the center less target that was theperson of Mr. Mowen, president of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company,Inc., of Connecticut. "But, Miss Taggart, my dear Miss Taggart! My companyhas served your company for generations, why, your grandfather was the firstcustomer of my grandfather, so you cannot doubt our eagerness to do anythingyou ask, but—did you say switches made of Rearden Metal?"

"Yes."

"But, Miss Taggart! Consider what it would mean, having to work with thatmetal. Do you know that the stuff won't melt under less than four thousanddegrees? . . . Great? Well, maybe that's great for motor manufacturers, butwhat I'm thinking of is that it means a new type of furnace, a new processentirely, men to be trained, schedules upset, work rules shot, everything

balled up and then God only knows whether it will come out right or not! . .. How do you know, Miss Taggart? How can you know, when it's never been donebefore? . . .

Well, I can't say that that metal is good and I can't say that it isn't.

. . . Well, no, I can't tell whether it's a product of genius, as you say,or just another fraud as a great many people are saying, Miss Taggart, agreat many. . . . Well, no, I can't say that it does matter one way or theother, because who am I to take a chance on a job of this kind?"

She had doubled the price of her order. Rearden had sent two metallurgiststo train Mowen's men, to teach, to show, to explain every step of theprocess, and had paid the salaries of Mowen's men while they were beingtrained.

She looked at the spikes in the rail at her feet. They meant the nightwhen she had heard that Summit Casting of Illinois, the only company willingto make spikes of Rearden Metal, had gone bankrupt, with half of her orderundelivered. She had flown to Chicago, that night, she had got three lawyers,a judge and a state legislator out of bed, she had bribed two of them andthreatened the others, she had obtained a paper that was an emergency permitof a legality no one would ever be able to untangle, she had had thepadlocked doors of the Summit Casting plant unlocked and a random, half-dressed crew working at the smelters before the windows had turned gray withdaylight. The crews had remained at work, under a Taggart engineer and aRearden metallurgist. The rebuilding of the Rio Norte Line was not held up.

She listened to the sound of the drills. The work had been held up once,when the drilling for the bridge abutments was stepped. "I couldn't help it,Miss Taggart," Ben Nealy had said, offended. "You know how fast drill headswear out. I had them on order, but Incorporated Tool ran into a littletrouble, they couldn't help it either, Associated Steel was delayed indelivering the steel to them, so there's nothing we can do but wait. It's nouse getting upset, Miss Taggart, I'm doing my best."

"I've hired you to do a job, not to do your best—whatever that is."

"That's a funny thing to say. That's an unpopular attitude, Miss Taggart,mighty unpopular."

"Forget Incorporated Tool. Forget the steel. Order the doll heads made ofRearden Metal."

"Not me. I've had enough trouble with the damn stuff in that rail ofyours. I'm not going to mess up my own equipment."

"A drill head of Rearden Metal will outlast three of steel.""Maybe."

"I said order them made.""Who's going to pay for it?""I am."

"Who's going to find somebody to make them?"

She had telephoned Rearden. He had found an abandoned tool plant, longsince out of business. Within an hour, he had purchased it from the relativesof its last owner. Within a day, the plant had been reopened. Within a week,drill heads of Rearden Metal lad been delivered to the bridge in Colorado.

She looked at the bridge. It represented a problem badly solved, but shehad had to accept it. The bridge, twelve hundred feet of steel across theblack gap, was built in the days of Nat Taggart's son. It was long past thestage of safety; it had been patched with stringers of steel, then of iron,then of wood; it was barely worth the patching.

She had thought of a new bridge of Rearden Metal. She had asked her chiefengineer to submit a design and an estimate of the cost.

The design he had submitted was the scheme of a steel bridge badly scaleddown to the greater strength of the new metal; the cost made the projectimpossible to consider.

"I beg your pardon, Miss Taggart, " he had said, offended. "I don't knowwhat you mean when you say that I haven't made use of the metal. This designis an adaptation of the best bridges on record.

What else did you expect?"

"A new method of construction."

"What do you mean, a new method?"

"I mean that when men got structural steel, they did not use it to buildsteel copies of wooden bridges." She had added wearily, "Get me an estimateon what we'll need to make our old bridge last for another five years."

"Yes, Miss Taggart," he had said cheerfully. "If we reinforce it withsteel-"

"We'll reinforce it with Rearden Metal.""Yes, Miss Taggart," he had said coldly.

She looked at the snow-covered mountains. Her job had seemed hard attimes, in New York. She had stopped for blank moments in the middle of heroffice, paralyzed by despair at the rigidity of time which she could notstretch any further—on a day when urgent appointments had succeeded oneanother, when she had discussed worn Diesels, rotting freight cars, failingsignal systems, falling revenues, while thinking of the latest emergency onthe Rio Norte construction; when she had talked, with the vision of twostreaks of green-blue metal cutting across her mind; when she had interruptedthe discussions, realizing suddenly why a certain news item had disturbedher, and seized the telephone receiver to call long-distance, to call hercontractor, to say, "Where do you get the food from, for your men?

. . . I thought so. Well, Barton and Jones of Denver went bankruptyesterday. Better find another supplier at once, if you don't want to have afamine on your hands." She had been building the line from her desk in NewYork. It had seemed hard. But now she was looking at the track. It wasgrowing. It would be done on time.

She heard sharp, hurried footsteps, and turned. A man was coming up thetrack. He was tall and young, his head of black hair was hatless in the coldwind, he wore a workman's leather jacket, but he did not look like a workman,there was too imperious an assurance in the way he walked. She could notrecognize the face until he came closer. It was Ellis Wyatt. She had not seenhim since that one interview in her office.

He approached, stopped, looked at her and smiled.

"Hello, Dagny," he said.

In a single shock of emotion, she knew everything the two words wereintended to tell her. It was forgiveness, understanding, acknowledgment. Itwas a salute.

She laughed, like a child, in happiness that things should be as right asthat.

"Hello," she said, extending her hand.

His hand held hers an instant longer than a greeting required. It wastheir signature under a score settled and understood.

"Tell Nealy to put up new snow fences for a mile and a half on GranadaPass," he said. "The old ones are rotted. They won't stand through anotherstorm. Send him a rotary plow. What he's got is a piece of junk that wouldn'tsweep a back yard. The big snows are coming any day now."

She considered him for a moment. "How often have you been doing this?" sheasked, "What?"

"Coming to watch the work."

"Every now and then. When I have the time. Why?"

"Were you here the night when they had the rock slide?"

"Yes."

"I was surprised how quickly and well they cleared the track, when I gotthe reports about it. It made me think that Nealy was a better man than I hadthought"

"He isn't."

"Was it you who organized the system of moving his day's supplies down tothe line?"

"Sure. His men used to spend half their time hunting for things.

Tell him to watch his water tanks. They'll freeze on him one of thesenights. See if you can get him a new ditcher. I don't like the looks of theone he's got. Check on his wiring system."

She looked at him for a moment. "Thanks, Ellis," she said.

He smiled and walked on. She watched him as he walked across the bridge,as he started up the long rise toward his derricks.

"He thinks he owns the place, doesn't he?"

She turned, startled. Ben Nealy had approached her; his thumb was pointingat Ellis Wyatt."What place?"

"The railroad, Miss Taggart. Your railroad. Or the whole world maybe.That's what he thinks."

Ben Nealy was a bulky man with a soft, sullen face. His eyes were stubbornand blank. In die bluish light of the snow, his skin had the tinge of butter.

"What does he keep hanging around here for?" he said. "As if nobody knewtheir business but him. The snooty show-off. Who does he think he is?"

"God damn you," said Dagny evenly, not raising her voice.

Nealy could never know what had made her say it. But some part of him, insome way of his own, knew it: the shocking thing to her was that he was notshocked. He said nothing.

"Let's go to your quarters," she said wearily, pointing to an old railwaycoach on a spur in the distance. "Have somebody there to take notes."

"Now about those crossties, Miss Taggart," he said hastily as theystarted. "Mr. Coleman of your office okayed them. He didn't say anythingabout too much bark. I don't see why you think they're—"

"I said you're going to replace them."

When she came out of the coach, exhausted by two hours of effort to bepatient, to instruct, to explain—she saw an automobile parked on the torndirt road below, a black two-seater, sparkling and new. A new car was anastonishing sight anywhere; one did not see them often.

She glanced around and gasped at the sight of the tall figure standing atthe foot of the bridge. It was Hank Rearden; she had not expected to find himin Colorado. He seemed absorbed in calculations, pencil and notebook in hand.His clothes attracted attention, like his car and for the same reason; hewore a simple trenchcoat and a hat with a slanting brim, but they were ofsuch good quality, so flagrantly expensive that they appeared ostentatiousamong the seedy garments of the crowds everywhere, the more ostentatiousbecause worn so naturally.

She noticed suddenly that she was running toward him; she had lost alltrace of exhaustion. Then she remembered that she had not seen him since theparty. She stopped.

He saw her, he waved to her in a gesture of pleased, astonished greeting,and he walked forward to meet her. He was smiling.

"Hello," he said. "Your first trip to the job?"

"My fifth, in three months."

"I didn't know you were here. Nobody told me.""I thought you'd break down some day.""Break down?"

"Enough to come and see this. There's your Metal. How do you like it?"

He glanced around. "If you ever decide to quit the railroad business, letme know."

"You'd give me a job?""Any time."

She looked at him for a moment. "You're only half-kidding, Hank.I think you'd like it—having me ask you for a job. Having me for anemployee instead of a customer. Giving me orders to obey.""Yes. I would."

She said, her face hard, "Don't quit the steel business, I won't promiseyou a job on the railroad."He laughed. "Don't try it.""What?"

"To win any battle when I set the terms."

She did not answer. She was struck by what the words made her feel; it wasnot an emotion, but a physical sensation of pleasure, which she could notname or understand.

"incidentally," he said, "this is not my first trip. I was hereyesterday."

"You were? Why?"

"Oh, I came to Colorado on some business of my own, so I thought I'd takea look at this."

"What are you after?"

"Why do you assume that I'm after anything?"

"You wouldn't waste time coming here just to look. Not twice."He laughed. "True." He pointed at the bridge. "I'm after that.""What about it?"

"It's ready for the scrap heap."

"Do you suppose that I don't know it?"

"I saw the specifications of your order for Rearden Metal members for thatbridge. You're wasting your money. The difference between what you'replanning to spend on a makeshift that will last a couple of years, and thecost of a new Rearden Metal bridge, is comparatively so little that I don'tsee why you want to bother preserving this museum piece."

"I've thought of a new Rearden Metal bridge, I've had my engineers give mean estimate."

"What did they tell you?"

"Two million dollars."

"Good God!"

"What would you say?"

"Eight hundred thousand."

She looked at him. She knew that he never spoke idly. She asked, trying tosound calm, "How?""Like this."

He showed her his notebook. She saw the disjoined notations he had made, agreat many figures, a few rough sketches. She understood his scheme before hehad finished explaining it. She did not notice that they had sat down, thatthey were sitting on a pile of frozen lumber, that her legs were pressed tothe rough planks and she could feel the cold through her thin stockings. Theywere bent together over a few scraps of paper which could make it possiblefor thousands of tons of freight to cross a cut of empty space. His voicesounded sharp and clear, while he explained thrusts, pulls, loads, windpressures. The bridge was to be a single twelve-hundred-foot truss span. Hehad devised a new type of truss. It had never been made before end could notbe made except with members that had the strength and the lightness ofRearden Metal.

"Hank," she asked, "did you invent this in two days?"

"Hell, no. I 'invented' it long before I had Rearden Metal. I figured itout while making steel for bridges. I wanted a metal with which one would beable to do this, among other things. I came here just to see your particularproblem for myself."

He chuckled, when he saw the slow movement of her hand across her eyes andthe line of bitterness in the set of her mouth, as if she were trying to wipeout the things against which she had fought such an exhausting, cheerlessbattle.

"This is only a rough scheme," he said, "but I believe you see what can bedone?"

"I can't tell you all that I see, Hank.""Don't bother. I know it."

"You're saving Taggart Transcontinental for the second time.""You used to be a better psychologist than that.""What do you mean?"

"Why should I give a damn about saving Taggart Transcontinental?Don't you know that I want to have a bridge of Rearden Metal to show thecountry?"

"Yes, Hank. I know it"

"There are too many people yelping that rails of Rearden Metal are unsafe.So I thought I'd give them something real to yelp about. Let them see abridge of Rearden Metal."

She looked at him and laughed aloud in simple delight.

"Now what's that?" he asked.

"Hank, I don't know anyone, not anyone in the world, who'd think of suchan answer to people, in such circumstances—except you."

"What about you? Would you want to make the answer with me and face thesame screaming?"

"You knew I would."

"Yes. I knew it."

He glanced at her, his eyes narrowed; he did not laugh as she had, but theglance was an equivalent.

She remembered suddenly their last meeting, at the party. The memoryseemed incredible. Their ease with each other—the strange, light-headedfeeling, which included the knowledge that it was the only sense of easeeither of them found anywhere—made the thought of hostility impossible. Yetshe knew that the party had taken place; he acted as if it had not.

They walked to the edge of the canyon. Together, they looked at the darkdrop, at the rise of rock beyond it, at the sun high on the derricks of WyattOil. She stood, her feet apart on the frozen stones, braced firmly againstthe wind. She could feel, without touching it, the line of his chest behindher shoulder. The wind beat her coat against his legs.

"Hank, do you think we can build it in time? There are only six monthsleft."

"Sure. It will take less time and labor than any other type of bridge.

Let me have my engineers work out the basic scheme and submit it to you.No obligation on your part. Just take a look at it and see for yourselfwhether you'll be able to afford it. You will. Then you can let your collegeboys work out the details."

"What about the Metal?"

"I'll get the Metal rolled if I have to throw every other order out of themills."

"You'll get it rolled on so short a notice?""Have I ever held you up on an order?"

"No. But the way things are going nowadays, you might not be able to helpit. "

"Who do you think you're talking to—Orren Boyle?"

She laughed. "All right. Let me have the drawings as soon as possible.I'll take a look and let you know within forty-eight hours. As to my collegeboys, they—" She stopped, frowning. "Hank, why is it so hard to find good menfor any job nowadays?"

"I don't know ..."

He looked at the lines of the mountains cut across the sky. A thin jet ofsmoke was rising from a distant valley.

"Have you seen the new towns of Colorado and the factories?" he asked."Yes."

"It's great, isn't it?—to see the kind of men they've gathered here fromevery corner of the country. All of them young, all of them starting on ashoestring and moving mountains."

"What mountain have you decided to move?"

"Why?"

"What are you doing in Colorado?"

He smiled. "Looking at a mining property."

"What sort?"

"Copper."

"Good God, don't you have enough to do?"

"I know it's a complicated job. But the supply of copper is becomingcompletely unreliable. There doesn't seem to be a single first-rate companyleft in the business in this country—and I don't want to deal with d'AnconiaCopper. I don't trust that playboy."

"I don't blame you," she said, looking away.

"So if there's no competent person left to do it, I'll have to mine my owncopper, as I mine my own iron ore. I can't take any chances on being held upby all those failures and shortages. I need a great deal of copper forRearden Metal."

"Have you bought the mine?"

"Not yet. There are a few problems to solve. Getting the men, theequipment, the transportation."

"Oh . . . !" She chuckled. "Going to speak to me about building a branchline?"

"Might. There's no limit to what's possible in this state. Do you knowthat they have every kind of natural resource here, waiting, untouched? Andthe way their factories are growing! I feel ten years younger when I comehere."

"I don't." She was looking east, past the mountains. "I think of thecontrast, all over the rest of the Taggart system. There's less to carry,less tonnage produced each year. It's as if . . . Hank, what's wrong with thecountry?"

"I don't know."

"I keep thinking of what they told us in school about the sun losingenergy, growing colder each year. I remember wondering, then, what it wouldbe like in the last days of the world. I think it would be . . .

like this. Growing colder and things stopping."

"I never believed that story. I thought by the time the sun was exhausted,men would find a substitute."

"You did? Funny. I thought that, too."

He pointed at the column of smoke. "There's your new sunrise. It's goingto feed the rest."

"If it's not stopped."

"Do you think it can be stopped?"

She looked at the rail under her feet. "No," she said.

He smiled. He looked down at the rail, then let his eyes move along thetrack, up the sides of the mountains, to the distant crane. She saw two

things, as if, for a moment, the two stood alone in her field of vision: thelines of his profile and the green-blue cord coiling through space."We've done it, haven't we?" he said.

In payment for every effort, for every sleepless night, for every silentthrust against despair, this moment was all she wanted. "Yes. We have."

She looked away, noticed an old crane on a siding, and thought that itscables were worn and would need replacing: This was the great clarity ofbeing beyond emotion, after the reward of having felt everything one couldfeel. Their achievement, she thought, and one moment of acknowledging it, ofpossessing it together—what greater intimacy could one share? Now she wasfree for the simplest, most commonplace concerns of the moment, becausenothing could be meaningless within her sight.

She wondered what made her certain that he felt as she did. He turnedabruptly and started toward his car. She followed. They did not look at eachother.

"I'm due to leave for the East in an hour," he said.She pointed at the car. "Where did you get that?"

"Here. It's a Hammond. Hammond of Colorado—they're the only people who'restill making a good car. I just bought it, on this trip.""Wonderful job.""Yes, isn't it?"

"Going to drive it back to New York?"

"No. Tm having it shipped. I flew my plane down here."

"Oh, you did? I drove down from Cheyenne—I had to see the line —but I'manxious to get home as fast as possible. Would you take me along? Can I flyback with you?"

He did not answer at once. She noticed the empty moment of a pause. "I'msorry," he said; she wondered whether she imagined the note of abruptness inhis voice. "I'm not flying back to New York. I'm going to Minnesota."

"Oh well, then I'll try to get on an air liner, if I can find one today,"

She watched his car vanish down the winding road. She drove to the airportan hour later. The place was a small field at the bottom of a break in thedesolate chain of mountains. There were patches of snow on the hard, pittedearth. The pole of a beacon stood at one side, trailing wires to the ground;the other poles had been knocked down by a storm.

A lonely attendant came to meet her. "No, Miss Taggart," he saidregretfully, "no planes till day after tomorrow. There's only onetranscontinental liner every two days, you know, and the one that was duetoday has been grounded, down in Arizona. Engine trouble, as usual." Headded, "It's a pity you didn't get here a bit sooner. Mr.

Rearden took off for New York, in his private plane, just a little whileago. "

"He wasn't flying to New York, was be?""Why, yes. He said so.""Are you sure?"

"He said he had an appointment there tonight."

She looked at the sky to the east, blankly, without moving. She had noclue to any reason, nothing to give her a foothold, nothing with which toweigh this or fight it or understand.

"Damn these streets!" said James Taggart. "We're going to be late."

Dagny glanced ahead, past the back of the chauffeur. Through the circlemade by a windshield wiper on the sleet-streaked glass, she saw black, worn,glistening car tops strung in a motionless line. Far ahead, the smear of ared lantern, low over the ground, marked a street excavation.

"There's something wrong on every other street," said Taggart irritably."Why doesn't somebody fix them?"

She leaned back against the seat, tightening the collar of her wrap.

She felt exhausted at the end of a day she had started at her desk, in heroffice, at seven A.M.; a day she had broken off, uncompleted, to rush homeand dress, because she had promised Jim to speak at the dinner of the NewYork Business Council "They want us to give them a talk about Rearden Metal,"he had said. "You can do it so much better than I. It's very important thatwe present a good case. There's such a controversy about Rearden Metal."

Sitting beside him in his car, she regretted that she had agreed. Shelooked at the streets of New York and thought of the race between metal andtime, between the rails of the Rio Norte Line and the passing days. She feltas if her nerves were being pulled tight by the stillness of the car, by theguilt of wasting an evening when she could not afford to waste an hour.

"With all those attacks on Rearden that one hears everywhere,"

said Taggart, "he might need a few friends."

She glanced at him incredulously. "You mean you want to stand by him?"He did not answer at once; he asked, his voice bleak, "That report of thespecial committee of the National Council of Metal Industries—what do you think of it?""You know what I think of it."

"They said Rearden Metal is a threat to public safety. They said itschemical composition is unsound, it's brittle, it's decomposing molecularly,and it will crack suddenly, without warning . . ."He stopped, as if beggingfor an answer. She did not answer. He asked anxiously, "You haven't changedyour mind about it, have you?"

"About what?"

"About that metal."

"No, Jim, I have not changed my mind."

"They're experts, though . . . the men on that committee. . . .

Top experts . . . Chief metallurgists for the biggest corporations, with astring of degrees from universities all over the country . . ."He said itunhappily, as if he were begging her to make him doubt these men and theirverdict.

She watched him, puzzled; this was not like him.

The car jerked forward. It moved slowly through a gap in a plank barrier,past the hole of a broken water main. She saw the new pipe stacked by theexcavation; the pipe bore a trademark: Stockton Foundry, Colorado. She lookedaway; she wished she were not reminded of Colorado.

"I can't understand it . . ." said Taggart miserably. "The top experts ofthe National Council of Metal Industries . . ."

"Who's the president of the National Council of Metal Industries, Jim?Orren Boyle, isn't it?"

Taggart did not turn to her, but his jaw snapped open. "If that fat slobthinks he can—" he started, but stopped and did not finish.

She looked up at a street lamp on the corner. It was a globe of glassfilled with light. It hung, secure from storm, lighting boarded windows andcracked sidewalks, as their only guardian. At the end of the street, acrossthe river, against the glow of a factory, she saw the thin tracing of a powerstation. A truck went by, hiding her view. It was the kind of truck that fedthe power station—a tank truck, its bright new paint impervious to sleet,green with white letters: Wyatt Oil, Colorado.

"Dagny, have you heard about that discussion at the structural steelworkers' union meeting in Detroit?"

"No. What discussion?"

"It was in all the newspapers. They debated whether their members shouldor should not be permitted to work with Rearden Metal.

They didn't reach a decision, but that was enough for the contractor whowas going to take a chance on Rearden Metal. He cancelled his order, butfast! . . . What if . . . what if everybody decides against it?"

"Let them."

A dot of light was rising in a straight line to the top of an invisibletower. It was the elevator of a great hotel. The car went past the building'salley. Men were moving a heavy, crated piece of equipment from a truck intothe basement. She saw the name on the crate: Nielsen Motors, Colorado.

"I don't like that resolution passed by the convention of the grade schoolteachers of New Mexico," said Taggart.

"What resolution?"

"They resolved that it was their opinion that children should not bepermitted to ride on the new Rio Norte Line of Taggart Transcontinental whenit's completed, because it is unsafe. . . . They said it specifically, thenew line of Taggart Transcontinental. It was in all the newspapers. It'sterrible publicity for us. . . . Dagny, what do you think we should do toanswer them?"

"Run the first train on the new Rio Norte Line."

He remained silent for a long time. He looked strangely dejected.

She could not understand it: he did not gloat, he did not use the opinionsof his favorite authorities against her, he seemed to be pleading forreassurance.

A car flashed past them; she had a moment's glimpse of power—a smooth,confident motion and a shining body. She knew the make of the car: Hammond,Colorado.

"Dagny, are we . . . are we going to have that line built ... on time?"It was strange to hear a note of plain emotion in his voice, theuncomplicated sound of animal fear.

"God help this city, if we don't!" she answered.

The car turned a corner. Above the black roofs of the city, she saw thepage of the calendar, hit by the white glare of a spotlight. It said: January29.

"Dan Conway is a bastard!"

The words broke out suddenly, as if he could not hold them any longer.She looked at him, bewildered. "Why?"

"He refused to sell us the Colorado track of the Phoenix-Durango.""You didn't—" She had to stop. She started again, keeping her voice flatin order not to scream. "You haven't approached him about it?""Of course I have!"

"You didn't expect him ... to sell it ... to you?"

"Why not?" His hysterically belligerent manner was back, "I offered himmore than anybody else did. We wouldn't have had the expense of tearing it upand carting it off, we could have used it as is. And it would have beenwonderful publicity for us—that we're giving up the Rearden Metal track indeference to public opinion. It would have been worth every penny of it ingood will! But the son of a bitch refused. He's actually declared that not afoot of rail would be sold to Taggart Transcontinental. He's selling itpiecemeal to any stray comer, to one-horse railroads in Arkansas or NorthDakota, selling it at a loss, way under what I offered him, the bastard!Doesn't even want to take a profit! And you should see those vulturesflocking to him! They know they'd never have a chance to get rail anywhereelse!"

She sat, her head bowed. She could not bear to look at him.

"I think it's contrary to the intent of the Anti-dog-cat-dog Rule," hesaid angrily. "I think it was the intent and purpose of the National Allianceof Railroads to protect the essential systems, not the jerkwaters of NorthDakota. But I can't get the Alliance to vote on it now, because they're alldown there, outbidding one another for that rail!"

She said slowly, as if she wished it were possible to wear gloves tohandle the words, "I see why you want me to defend Rearden Metal."

"I don't know what you're—""Shut up, Jim," she said quietly.

He remained silent for a moment. Then he drew his head back and drawleddefiantly, "You'd better do a good job of defending Rearden Metal, becauseBertram Scudder can get pretty sarcastic."

"Bertram Scudder?"

"He's going to be one of the speakers tonight."

"One of the . . . You didn't tell me there were to be other speakers.""Well . . . I . . . What difference does that make? You're not afraid ofhim, are you?"

"The New York Business Council . . . and you invite Bertram Scudder?"

"Why not? Don't you think it's smart? He doesn't have any hard feelingstoward businessmen, not really. He's accepted the invitation.

We want to be broad-minded and hear all sides and maybe win him over. . .. Well, what are you staring at? You'll be able to beat him, won't you?"

". . .to beat him?"

"On the air. It's going to be a radio broadcast. You're going to debatewith him the question: 'Is Rearden Metal a lethal product of greed?' "

She leaned forward. She pulled open the glass partition of the front seat,ordering, "Stop the car!"

She did not hear what Taggart was saying. She noticed dimly that his voicerose to screams: "They're waiting! . . . Five hundred people at the dinner,and a national hook-up! . . . You can't do this to me!"

He seized her arm, screaming, "But why?"

"You goddamn fool, do you think I consider their question debatable?"The car stopped, she leaped out and ran.

The first tiling she noticed after a while, was her slippers. She waswalking slowly, normally, and it was strange to feel iced stone under thethin soles of black satin sandals. She pushed her hair back, off herforehead, and felt drops of sleet melting on her palm.

She was quiet now; the blinding anger was gone; she felt nothing but agray weariness. Her head ached a little, she realized that she was hungry andremembered that she was to have had dinner at the Business Council. Shewalked on. She did not want to eat. She thought she would get a cup of coffeesomewhere, then take a cab home.

She glanced around her. There were no cabs in sight. She did not know theneighborhood. It did not seem to be a good one. She saw an empty stretch ofspace across the street, an abandoned park encircled by a jagged line thatbegan as distant skyscrapers and came down to factory chimneys; she saw a fewlights in the windows of dilapidated houses, a few small, grimy shops closedfor the night, and the fog of the East River two blocks away.

She started back toward the center of the city. The black shape of a ruinrose before her. It had been an office building, long ago; she saw the skythrough the naked steel skeleton and the angular remnants of the bricks thathad crumbled. In the shadow of the ruin, like a blade of grass fighting tolive at the roots of a dead giant, there stood a small diner. Its windowswere a bright band of glass and light. She went in.

There was a clean counter inside, with a shining strip of chromium at theedges. There was a bright metal boiler and the odor of coffee. A fewderelicts sat at the counter, a husky, elderly man stood behind it, thesleeves of his clean white shirt rolled at the elbows. The warm air made herrealize, in simple gratitude, that she had been cold. She pulled her blackvelvet cape tight about her and sat down at the counter.

"A cup of coffee, please," she said.

The men looked at her without curiosity. They did not seem astonished tosee a woman in evening clothes enter a slum diner; nothing astonished anyone,

these days. The owner turned impassively to fill her order; there was, in hisstolid indifference, the kind of mercifulness that asks no questions.

She could not tell whether the four at the counter were beggars or Workingmen; neither clothes nor manner showed the difference, these days. The ownerplaced a mug of coffee before her. She closed both hands about it, findingenjoyment in its warmth.

She glanced around her and thought, in habitual professional calculation,how wonderful it was that one could buy so much for a dime.

Her eyes moved from the stainless steel cylinder of the coffee boiler tothe cast-iron griddle, to the glass shelves, to the enameled sink, to thechromium blades of a mixer. The owner was making toast. She found pleasure inwatching the ingenuity of an open belt that moved slowly, carrying slices ofbread past glowing electric coils. Then she saw the name stamped on thetoaster: Marsh, Colorado.

Her head fell down on her arm on the counter.

"It's no use, lady," said the old bum beside her.

She had to raise her head. She had to smile in amusement, at him and atherself.

"It isn't?" she asked.

"No. Forget it. You're only fooling yourself.""About what?"

"About anything being worth a damn. It's dust, lady, all of it, dust andblood. Don't believe the dreams they pump you full of, and you won't gethurt."

"What dreams?"

"The stories they tell you when you're young—about the human spirit. Thereisn't any human spirit. Man is just a low-grade animal, without intellect,without soul, without virtues or moral values. An animal with only twocapacities: to eat and to reproduce."

His gaunt face, with staring eyes and shrunken features that had beendelicate, still retained a trace of distinction. He looked like the hulk ofan evangelist or a professor of esthetics who had spent years incontemplation in obscure museums. She wondered what had destroyed him, whaterror on the way could bring a man to this.

"You go through life looking for beauty, for greatness, for some sublimeachievement," he said. "And what do you find? A lot of trick machinery formaking upholstered cars or inner-spring mattresses."

"What's wrong with inner-spring mattresses?" said a man who looked like atruck driver. "Don't mind him, lady. He likes to hear himself talk. He don'tmean no harm."

"Man's only talent is an ignoble cunning for satisfying the needs of hisbody," said the old bum. "No intelligence is required for that.

Don't believe the stories about man's mind, his spirit, his ideals, hissense of unlimited ambition."

"I don't," said a young boy who sat at the end of the counter. He wore acoat ripped across one shoulder; his square-shaped mouth seemed formed by thebitterness of a lifetime.

"Spirit?" said the old bum. "There's no spirit involved in manufacturingor in sex. Yet these are man's only concerns. Matter—that's all men know orcare about. As witness our great industries—the only accomplishment of ouralleged civilization—built by vulgar materialists with the aims, theinterests and the moral sense of hogs. It doesn't take any morality to turnout a ten-ton truck on an assembly line."

"What is morality?" she asked.

"Judgment to distinguish right and wrong, vision to see the truth, courageto act upon it, dedication to that which is good, integrity to stand by thegood at any price. But where does one find it?"

The young boy made a sound that was half-chuckle, half-sneer: "Who is JohnGait?"

She drank the coffee, concerned with nothing but the pleasure of feelingas if the hot liquid were reviving the arteries of her body.

"I can tell you," said a small, shriveled tramp who wore a cap pulled lowover his eyes. "I know."

Nobody heard him or paid any attention. The young boy was watching Dagnywith a kind of fierce, purposeless intensity.

"You're not afraid," he said to her suddenly, without explanation, a fiatstatement in a brusque, lifeless voice that had a note of wonder.

She looked at him. "No," she said, "I'm not."

"I know who is John Gait," said the tramp. "It's a secret, but I know it.""Who?" she asked without interest.

"An explorer," said the tramp. "The greatest explorer that ever lived. Theman who found the fountain of youth."

"Give me another cup. Black," said the old bum, pushing his cup across thecounter.

"John Gait spent years looking for it. He crossed oceans, and he crosseddeserts, and he went down into forgotten mines, miles under the earth. But hefound it on the top of a mountain. It took him ten years to climb thatmountain. It broke every bone in his body, it tore the skin off his hands, itmade him lose his home, his name, his love.

But he climbed it. He found the fountain of youth, which he wanted tobring down to men. Only he never came back."

"Why didn't he?" she asked.

"Because he found that it couldn't be brought down."

The man who sat in front of Rearden's desk had vague features and a mannerdevoid of all emphasis, so that one could form no specific image of his facenor detect the driving motive of his person. His only mark of distinctionseemed to be a bulbous nose, a bit too large for the rest of him; his mannerwas meek, but it conveyed a preposterous hint, the hint of a threatdeliberately kept furtive, yet intended to be recognized. Rearden could notunderstand the purpose of his visit. He was Dr. Potter, who held someundefined position with the State Science Institute.

"What do you want?" Rearden asked for the third time.

"It is the social aspect that I am asking you to consider, Mr.

Rearden," the man said softly, "I urge you to take note of the age we'reliving in. Our economy is not ready for it."

"For what?"

"Our economy is in a state of extremely precarious equilibrium. We allhave to pool our efforts to save it from collapse.""Well, what is it you want me to do?"

"These are the considerations which I was asked to call to your attention.I am from the State Science Institute, Mr. Rearden."

"You've said so before. But what did you wish to see me about?"

"The State Science Institute does not hold a favorable opinion of ReardenMetal."

"You've said that, too."

"Isn't that a factor which you must take into consideration?""No. "

The light was growing dim in the broad windows of the office. The dayswere short. Rearden saw the irregular shadow of the nose on the man's cheek,and the pale eyes watching him; the glance was vague, but its directionpurposeful.

"The State Science Institute represents the best brains of the country,Mr. Rearden."

"So I'm told."

"Surely you do not want to pit your own judgment against theirs?""I do."

The man looked at Rearden as if pleading for help, as if Rearden hadbroken an unwritten code which demanded that he should have understood longago. Rearden offered no help.

"Is this all you wanted to know?" he asked.

"It's only a question of time, Mr. Rearden," the man said placatingly."Just a temporary delay. Just to give our economy a chance to get stabilized.If you'd only wait for a couple of years—"

Rearden chuckled, gaily, contemptuously. "So that's what you're after?Want me to take Rearden Metal off the market? Why?"

"Only for a few years, Mr. Rearden. Only until—"

"Look," said Rearden. "Now I'll ask you a question: did your scientistsdecide that Rearden Metal is not what I claim it is?""We have not committed ourselves as to that.""Did they decide it's no good?"

"It is the social impact of a product that must be considered. We arethinking in terms of the country as a whole, we are concerned with the publicwelfare and the terrible crisis of the present moment, which—"

"Is Rearden Metal good or not?"

"If we view the picture from the angle of the alarming growth ofunemployment, which at present—""Is Rearden Metal good?"

"At a time of desperate steel shortage, we cannot afford to permit theexpansion of a steel company which produces too much, because it might throwout of business the companies which produce too little, thus creating anunbalanced economy which—"

"Are you going to answer my question?"

The man shrugged. "Questions of value are relative. If Rearden Metal isnot good, it's a physical danger to the public. If it is good-it's a social danger."

"If you have anything to say to me about the physical danger of ReardenMetal, say it. Drop the rest of it. Fast. I don't speak that language.""But surely questions of social welfare—""Drop it."

The man looked bewildered and lost, as if the ground had been cut fromunder his feet. In a moment, he asked helplessly, "But what, then, is yourchief concern?"

"The market."

"How do you mean?"

"There's a market for Rearden Metal and I intend to take full advantage ofit. "

"Isn't the market somewhat hypothetical? The public response to your metalhas not been encouraging. Except for the order from Taggart Transcontinental,you haven't obtained any major—"

"Well, then, if you think the public won't go for it, what are youworrying about?"

"If the public doesn't go for it, you will take a heavy loss, Mr.Rearden."

"That's my worry, not yours."

"Whereas, if you adopt a more co-operative attitude and agree to wait fora few years—"

"Why should I wait?"

"But I believe I have made it clear that the State Science Institute doesnot approve of the appearance of Rearden Metal on the metallurgical scene atthe present time."

"Why should I give a damn about that?"

The man sighed. "You are a very difficult man, Mr. Rearden."

The sky of the late afternoon was growing heavy, as if thickening againstthe glass of the windowpanes. The outlines of the man's figure seemed todissolve into a blob among the sharp, straight planes of the furniture.

"I gave you this appointment," said Rearden, "because you told me that youwished to discuss something of extreme importance. If this is all you had tosay, you will please excuse me now. I am very busy."

The man settled back in his chair. "I believe you have spent ten years ofresearch on Rearden Metal," he said. "How much has it cost you?"

Rearden glanced up: he could not understand the drift of the question, yetthere was an undisguised purposefulness in the man's voice; the voice hadhardened.

"One and a half million dollars," said Rearden."How much will you take for it?"

Rearden had to let a moment pass. He could not believe it. "For what?" heasked, his voice low.

"For all rights to Rearden Metal."

"I think you had better get out of here,"' said Rearden."There is no call for such an attitude. You are a businessman. I amoffering you a business proposition. You may name your own price.""The rights to Rearden Metal are not for sale."

"I am in a position to speak of large sums of money. Government money."

Rearden sat without moving, the muscles of his cheeks pulled tight; buthis glance was indifferent, focused only by the faint pull of morbidcuriosity.

"You are a businessman, Mr. Rearden. This is a proposition which youcannot afford to ignore. On the one hand, you are gambling against greatodds, you are bucking an unfavorable public opinion, you run a good chance oflosing every penny you put into Rearden Metal. On the other hand, we canrelieve you of the risk and the responsibility, at an impressive profit, animmediate profit, much larger than you could hope to realize from the sale ofthe metal for the next twenty years."

"The State Science Institute is a scientific establishment, not acommercial one," said Rearden. "What is it that they're so afraid of?"

"You are using ugly, unnecessary words, Mr. Rearden. I am endeavoring tosuggest that we keep the discussion on a friendly plane. The matter isserious. "

"I am beginning to see that."

"We are offering you a blank check on what is, as you realize, anunlimited account. What else can you want? Name your price."

"The sale of the rights to Rearden Metal is not open to discussion.

If you have anything else to say, please say it and leave."

The man leaned back, looked at Rearden incredulously and asked, "What areyou after?"

"I? What do you mean?"

"You're in business to make money, aren't you?""I am."

"You want to make as big a profit as possible, don't you?""I do."

"Then why do you want to struggle for years, squeezing out your gains inthe form of pennies per ton—rather than accept a fortune for Rearden Metal?Why?"

"Because it's mine. Do you understand the word?"

The man sighed and rose to his feet. "I hope you will not have cause toregret your decision, Mr. Rearden," he said; the tone of his voice wassuggesting the opposite.

"Good day," said Rearden.

"I think I must tell you that the State Science Institute may issue anofficial statement condemning Rearden Metal."'That is their privilege."

"Such a statement would make things more difficult for you.""Undoubtedly."

"As to further consequences . . ." The man shrugged. "This is not the dayfor people who refuse to co-operate. In this age, one needs friends. You arenot a popular man, Mr. Rearden."

"What are you trying to say?"

"Surely, you understand."

"I don't."

"Society is a complex structure. There are so many different issuesawaiting decision, hanging by a thin thread. We can never tell when one suchissue may he decided and what may be the decisive factor in a delicatebalance. Do I make myself clear?"

"No. "

The red flame of poured steel shot through the twilight. An orange glow,the color of deep gold, hit the wall behind Rearden's desk.

The glow moved gently across his forehead. His face had an unmovingserenity.

"The State Science Institute is a government organization, Mr.

Rearden. There are certain bills pending in the Legislature, which may bepassed at any moment. Businessmen are peculiarly vulnerable these days. I amsure you understand me."

Rearden rose to his feet. He was smiling. He looked as if all tension hadleft him.

"No, Dr. Potter," he said, "I don't understand. If I did, I'd have to killyou. "

The man walked to the door, then stopped and looked at Rearden in a waywhich, for once, was simple human curiosity. Rearden stood motionless againstthe moving glow on the wall; he stood casually, his hands in his pockets.

"Would you tell me," the man asked, "just between us, it's only mypersonal curiosity—why are you doing this?"

Rearden answered quietly, "I'll tell you. You won't understand. You see,it's because Rearden Metal is good."

Dagny could not understand Mr. Mowen's motive. The Amalgamated Switch andSignal Company had suddenly given notice that they would not complete herorder. Nothing had happened, she could find no cause for it and they wouldgive no explanation.

She had hurried to Connecticut, to see Mr. Mowen in person, but the soleresult of the interview was a heavier, grayer weight of bewilderment in hermind. Mr. Mowen stated that he would not continue to make switches of ReardenMetal. For sole explanation, he said, avoiding her eyes, "Too many peopledon't like it."

"What? Rearden Metal or your making the switches?"

"Both, I guess . . . People don't like it ... I don't want any trouble.""What kind of trouble?""Any kind."

"Have you heard a single thing against Rearden Metal that's true?"

"Aw, who knows what's true? . . . That resolution of the National Councilof Metal Industries said—"

"Look, you've worked with metals all your life. For the last four months,you've worked with Rearden Metal. Don't you know that it's the greatest thingyou've ever handled?" He did not answer. "Don't you know it?" He looked away."Don't you know what's true?"

"Hell, Miss Taggart, I'm in business, I'm only a little guy. I just wantto make money."

"How do you think one makes it?"

But she knew that it was useless. Looking at Mr. Mowen's face, at the eyeswhich she could not catch, she felt as she had felt once on a lonely sectionof track, when a storm blew down the telephone wires: that communicationswere cut and that words had become sounds which transmitted nothing.

It was useless to argue, she thought, and to wonder about people who wouldneither refute an argument nor accept it. Sitting restlessly in the train, onher way back to New York, she told herself that Mr.

Mowen did not matter, that nothing mattered now, except finding somebodyelse to manufacture the switches. She was wrestling with a list of names inher mind, wondering who would be easiest to convince, to beg or to bribe.

She knew, the moment she entered the anteroom of her office, thatsomething had happened. She saw the unnatural stillness, with the faces ofher staff turned to her as if her entrance were the moment they had allwaited for, hoped for and dreaded.

Eddie Willers rose to his feet and started toward the door of her office,as if knowing that she would understand and follow. She had seen his face. Nomatter what it was, she thought, she wished it had not hurt him quite sobadly.

"The State Science Institute," he said quietly, when they were alone inher office, "has issued a statement warning people against the use of ReardenMetal." He added, "It was on the radio. It's in the afternoon papers."

"What did they say?"

"Dagny, they didn't say it! . . . They haven't really said it, yet it'sthere—and it isn't. That's what's monstrous about it."

His effort was focused on keeping his voice quiet; he could not controlhis words. The words were forced out of him by the unbelieving.

bewildered indignation of a child screaming in denial at his firstencounter with evil.

"What did they say, Eddie?"

"They . . . You'd have to read it." He pointed to the newspaper he hadleft on her desk. "They haven't said that Rearden Metal is bad.

They haven't said that it's unsafe. What they've done is . . ." His handsspread and dropped in a gesture of futility.

She saw at a glance what they had done. She saw the sentences: "It may bepossible that after a period of heavy usage, a sudden fissure may appear,though the length of this period cannot be predicted. . . . The possibilityof a molecular reaction, at present unknown, cannot be entirely discounted. .. . Although the tensile strength of the metal is obviously demonstrable,certain questions in regard to its behavior under unusual stress are not tobe ruled out.

. . . Although there is no evidence to support the contention that the useof the metal should be prohibited, a further study of its properties would beof value."

"We can't fight it. It can't be answered," Eddie was saying slowly.

"We can't demand a retraction. We can't show them our tests or proveanything. They've said nothing. They haven't said a thing that could berefuted and embarrass them professionally. It's the job of a coward.

You'd expect it from some con-man or blackmailer. But, Dagny! It's theState Science Institute!"

She nodded silently. She stood, her eyes fixed on some point beyond thewindow. At the end of a dark street, the bulbs of an electric sign kept goingon and off, as if winking at her maliciously.

Eddie gathered his strength and said in the tone of a military report,"Taggart stock has crashed. Ben Nealy quit. The National Brotherhood of Roadand Track Workers has forbidden its members to work on the Rio Norte Line.Jim has left town."

She took her hat and coat off, walked across the room and slowly, verydeliberately sat down at her desk.

She noticed a large brown envelope lying before her; it bore theletterhead of Rearden Steel.

"That came by special messenger, right after you left," said Eddie.

She put her hand on the envelope, but did not open it. She knew what itwas: the drawings of the bridge.

After a while, she asked, "Who issued that statement?"

Eddie glanced at her and smiled briefly, bitterly, shaking his head.

"No," he said. "I thought of that, too. I called the Institute longdistance and asked them. No, it was issued by the office of Dr. Floyd Ferris,their co-ordinator."

She said nothing.

"But still! Dr. Stadler is the head of that Institute. He is theInstitute. He must have known about it. He permitted it. If it's done, it'sdone in his name . . .Dr. Robert Stadler ... Do you remember . . . when wewere in college . . . how we used to talk about the great names in the world. . . the men of pure intellect . . . and we always chose his name as one ofthem, and—" He stopped. "I'm sorry, Dagny. I know it's no use sayinganything. Only—"

She sat, her hand pressed to the brown envelope.

"Dagny," he asked, his voice low, "what is happening to people?

Why did that statement succeed? It's such an obvious smear-job, so obviousand so rotten. You'd think a decent person would throw it in the gutter. Howcould"—his voice was breaking in gentle, desperate, rebellious anger—"howcould they accept it? Didn't they read it?

Didn't they see? Don't they think? Dagny! What is it in people that letsthem do this—and how can we live with it?"

"Quiet, Eddie," she said, "quiet. Don't be afraid."

The building of the State Science Institute stood over a river of NewHampshire, on a lonely hillside, halfway between the river and the sky. Froma distance, it looked like a solitary monument in a virgin forest. The treeswere carefully planted, the roads were laid out as a park, the roof tops of asmall town could be seen in a valley some miles away. But nothing had beenallowed to come too close and detract from the building's austerity.

The white marble of the walls gave it a classical grandeur; thecomposition of its rectangular masses gave it the cleanliness and beauty of amodern plant. It was an inspired structure. From across the river, peoplelooked at it with reverence and thought of it as a monument to a living manwhose character had the nobility of the building's lines.

Over the entrance, a dedication was cut into the marble: "To the fearlessmind. To the inviolate truth." In a quiet aisle, in a bare corridor, a smallbrass plate, such as dozens of other name plates on other doors, said: Dr.Robert Stadler.

At the age of twenty-seven, Dr. Robert Stadler had written a treatise oncosmic rays, which demolished most of the theories held by the scientists whopreceded him. Those who followed, found his achievement somewhere at the baseof any line of inquiry they undertook.

At the age of thirty, he was recognized as the greatest physicist of histime. At thirty-two, he became head of the Department of Physics of thePatrick Henry University, in the days when the great University stilldeserved its glory. It was of Dr. Robert Stadler that a writer had said:"Perhaps, among the phenomena of the universe which he is studying, none isso miraculous as the brain of Dr. Robert Stadler himself." It was Dr. RobertStadler who had once corrected a student: "Free scientific inquiry? The firstadjective is redundant."

At the age of forty, Dr. Robert Stadler addressed the nation, endorsingthe establishment of a State Science Institute. "Set science free of the ruleof the dollar," he pleaded. The issue had hung in the balance; an obscuregroup of scientists had quietly forced a bill through its long way to thefloor of the Legislature; there had been some public hesitation about thebill, some doubt, an uneasiness no one could define. The name of Dr. RobertStadler acted upon the country like the cosmic rays he studied: it piercedany barrier. The nation built the white marble edifice as a personal presentto one of its greatest men.

Dr. Stadler's office at the Institute was a small room that looked likethe office of the bookkeeper of an unsuccessful firm. There was n cheap deskof ugly yellow oak, a filing cabinet, two chairs, and a blackboard chalkedwith mathematical formulas. Sitting on one of the chairs against a blankwall, Dagny thought that the office had an air of ostentation and elegance,together: ostentation, because it seemed intended to suggest that the ownerwas great enough to permit himself such a setting; elegance, because he trulyneeded nothing else.

She had met Dr. Stadler on a few occasions, at banquets given by leadingbusinessmen or great engineering societies, in honor of some solemn cause oranother. She had attended the occasions as reluctantly as he did, and hadfound that he liked to talk to her. "Miss Taggart,"

he had said to her once, "I never expect to encounter intelligence.

That I should find it here is such an astonishing relief!" She had come tohis office, remembering that sentence. She sat, watching him in the manner ofa scientist: assuming nothing, discarding emotion, seeking only to observeand to understand.

"Miss Taggart," he said gaily, "I'm curious about you, I'm curiouswhenever anything upsets a precedent. As a rule, visitors are a painful dutyto me. I'm frankly astonished that I should feel such a simple pleasure inseeing you here. Do you know what it's like to feel suddenly that one cantalk without the strain of trying to force some sort of understanding out ofa vacuum?"

He sat on the edge of his desk, his manner gaily informal. He was nottall, and his slenderness gave him an air of youthful energy, almost ofboyish zest. His thin face was ageless; it was a homely face, but the greatforehead and the large gray eyes held such an arresting intelligence that onecould notice nothing else. There were wrinkles of humor in the corners of theeyes, and faint lines of bitterness in the corners of the mouth. He did notlook like a man in his early fifties; the slightly graying hair was his onlysign of age.

"Tell me more about yourself," he said. "I always meant to ask you whatyou're doing in such an unlikely career as heavy industry and how you canstand those people."

"I cannot take too much of your time, Dr. Stadler." She spoke with polite,impersonal precision. "And the matter I came to discuss is extremelyimportant."

He laughed. "There's a sign of the businessman—wanting to come to thepoint at once. Well, by all means. But don't worry about my time—it's yours.Now, what was it you said you wanted to discuss?

Oh yes. Rearden Metal. Not exactly one of the subjects on which I'm bestinformed, but if there's anything I can do for you—" His hand moved in agesture of invitation.

"Do you know the statement issued by this Institute in regard to ReardenMetal?"

He frowned slightly. "Yes, I've heard about it.""Have you read it?""No. "

"It was intended to prevent the use of Rearden Metal.""Yes, yes, I gathered that much.""Could you tell me why?"

He spread his hands; they were attractive hands—long and bony, beautifulin their suggestion of nervous energy and strength. "I really wouldn't know.That is the province of Dr. Ferris. I'm sure he had his reasons. Would youlike to speak to Dr. Ferris?"

"No. Are you familiar with the metallurgical nature of Rearden Metal, Dr.Stadler?"

"Why, yes, a little. But tell me, why are you concerned about it?"

A flicker of astonishment rose and died in her eyes; she answered withoutchange in the impersonal tone of her voice, "I am building a branch line withrails of Rearden Metal, which—"

"Oh, but of course! I did hear something about it. You must forgive me, Idon't read the newspapers as regularly as I should. It's your railroad that'sbuilding that new branch, isn't it?"

"The existence of my railroad depends upon the completion of that branch—and, I think, " eventually, the existence of this country will depend on it aswell."

The wrinkles of amusement deepened about his eyes. "Can you make such astatement with positive assurance, Miss Taggart? I couldn't.""In this case?"

"In any case. Nobody can tell what the course of a country's future maybe. It is not a matter of calculable trends, but a chaos subject to the ruleof the moment, in which anything is possible."

"Do you think that production is necessary to the existence of a country,Dr. Stadler?"

"Why, yes, yes, of course."

"The building of our branch line has been stopped by the statement of thisInstitute."

He did not smile and he did not answer.

"Does that statement represent your conclusion about the nature of ReardenMetal?" she asked.

"I have said that I have not read it." There was an edge of sharpness inhis voice.

She opened her bag, took out a newspaper clipping and extended it to him."Would you read it and tell me whether this is a language which science mayproperly speak?"

He glanced through the clipping, smiled contemptuously and tossed it asidewith a gesture of distaste. "Disgusting, isn't it?" he said. "But what canyou do when you deal with people?"

She looked at him, not understanding. "You do not approve of thatstatement?"

He shrugged. "My approval or disapproval would be irrelevant.""Have you formed a conclusion of your own about Rearden Metal?""Well, metallurgy is not exactly—what shall we say?—my specialty.""Have you examined any data on Rearden Metal?"

"Miss Taggart, I don't see the point of your questions." His voice soundedfaintly impatient.

"I would like to know your personal verdict on Rearden Metal,""For what purpose?"

"So that I may give it to the press."He got up. "That is quite impossible."

She said, her voice strained with the effort of trying to forceunderstanding, "I will submit to you all the information necessary to form aconclusive judgment."

"I cannot issue any public statements about it."

"Why not?"

"The situation is much too complex to explain in a casual discussion.""But if you should find that Rearden Metal is, in fact, an extremelyvaluable product which—"

"That is beside the point."

"The value of Rearden Metal is beside the point?"

"There are other issues involved, besides questions of fact."

She asked, not quite believing that she had heard him right, "What otherissues is science concerned with, besides questions of fact?"

The bitter lines of his mouth sharpened into the suggestion of a smile."Miss Taggart, you do not understand the problems of scientists."

She said slowly, as if she were seeing it suddenly in time with her words,"I believe that you do know what Rearden Metal really is."

He shrugged. "Yes. I know. From such information as I've seen, it appearsto be a remarkable thing. Quite a brilliant achievement—as far as technologyis concerned." He was pacing impatiently across the office. "In fact, Ishould like, some day, to order a special laboratory motor that would standjust such high temperatures as Rearden Metal can take. It would be veryvaluable in connection with certain phenomena I should like to observe. Ihave found that when particles are accelerated to a speed approaching thespeed of light, they—"

"Dr. Stadler, " she asked slowly, "you know the truth, yet you will notstate it publicly?"

"Miss Taggart, you are using an abstract term, when we are dealing with amatter of practical reality."

"We are dealing with a matter of science."

"Science? Aren't you confusing the standards involved? It is only in therealm of pure science that truth is an absolute criterion. When we deal withapplied science, with technology—we deal with people.

And when we deal with people, considerations other than truth enter thequestion."

"What considerations?"

"I am not a technologist, Miss Taggart. I have no talent or taste fordealing with people. I cannot become involved in so-called practicalmatters."

"That statement was issued in your name.""I had nothing to do with it!"

"The name of this Institute is your responsibility.""That's a perfectly unwarranted assumption."

"People think that the honor of your name is the guarantee behind anyaction of this Institute."

"I can't help what people think—if they think at all!""They accepted your statement. It was a lie.""How can one deal in truth when one deals with the public?""I don't understand you," she said very quietly.

"Questions of truth do not enter into social issues. No principles haveever had any effect on society."

"What, then, directs men's actions?"

He shrugged. "The expediency of the moment,"

"Dr. Stadler," she said, "I think I must tell you the meaning and theconsequences of the fact that the construction of my branch line is beingstopped. I am stopped, in the name of public safety, because I am using thebest rail ever produced. In six months, if I do not complete that line, thebest industrial section of the country will be left without transportation.It will be destroyed, because it was the best and there were men who thoughtit expedient to seize a share of its wealth."

"Well, that may be vicious, unjust, calamitous—but such is life insociety. Somebody is always sacrificed, as a rule unjustly; there is no otherway to live among men. What can any one person do?"

"You can state the truth about Rearden Metal."

He did not answer.

"I could beg you to do it in order to save me. I could beg you to do it inorder to avert a national disaster. But I won't. These may not be validreasons. There is only one reason; you must say it, because it is true."

"I was not consulted about that statement!" The cry broke outinvoluntarily. "I wouldn't have allowed it! I don't like it any better thanyou do! But I can't issue a public denial!"

"You were not consulted? Then shouldn't you want to find out the reasonsbehind that statement?"

"I can't destroy the Institute now!"

"Shouldn't you want to find out the reasons?"

"I know the reasons! They won't tell me, but I know. And I can't say thatI blame them, either.""Would you tell me?"

"I'll tell you, if you wish. It's the truth that you want, isn't it?

Dr. Ferris cannot help it, if the morons who vote the funds for thisInstitute insist on what they call results. They are incapable of conceivingof such a thing as abstract science. They can judge it only in terms of thelatest gadget it has produced for them. I do not know how Dr. Ferris hasmanaged to keep this Institute in existence, I can only marvel at hispractical ability. I don't believe he ever was a first-rate scientist—butwhat a priceless valet of science! I know that he has been facing a graveproblem lately. He's kept me out of it, he spares me all that, but I do hearrumors. People have been criticizing the Institute, because, they say, wehave not produced enough. The public has been demanding economy. In timeslike these, when their fat little comforts are threatened, you may be surethat science is the first thing men will sacrifice. This is the onlyestablishment left. There are practically no private research foundations anylonger. Look at the greedy ruffians who run our industries. You cannot expectthem to support science."

"Who is supporting you now?" she asked, her voice low.

He shrugged. "Society."

She said, with effort, "You were going to tell me the reasons behind thatstatement."

"I wouldn't think you'd find them hard to deduce. If you consider that forthirteen years this Institute has had a department of metallurgical research,which has cost over twenty million dollars and has produced nothing but a newsilver polish and a new anti-corrosive preparation, which, I believe, is notso good as the old ones—you can imagine what the public reaction will be ifsome private individual comes out with a product that revolutionizes theentire science of metallurgy and proves to be sensationally successful!"

Her head dropped. She said nothing.

"I don't blame our metallurgical department!" he said angrily. "I knowthat results of this kind are not a matter of any predictable time.

But the public won't understand it. What, then, should we sacrifice? Anexcellent piece of smelting—or the last center of science left on earth, andthe whole future of human knowledge? That is the alternative."

She sat, her head down. After a while, she said, "AH right, Dr. Stadler. Iwon't argue."

He saw her groping for her bag, as if she were trying to remember theautomatic motions necessary to get up.

"Miss Taggart," he said quietly. It was almost a plea. She looked up.Her face was composed and empty.

He came closer; he leaned with one hand against the wall above her head,almost as if he wished to hold her in the circle of his arm.

"Miss Taggart, " he said, a tone of gentle, bitter persuasiveness in hisvoice, "I am older than you. Believe me, there is no other way to live onearth, Men are not open to truth or reason. They cannot be reached by arational argument. The mind is powerless against them. Yet we have to dealwith them. If we want to accomplish anything, we have to deceive them intoletting us accomplish it. Or force them. They understand nothing else. Wecannot expect their support for any endeavor of the intellect, for any goalof the spirit. They are nothing but vicious animals. They are greedy, self-indulgent, predatory dollar-chasers who—"

"I am one of the dollar-chasers, Dr. Stadler, " she said, her voice low.

"You are an unusual, brilliant child who has not seen enough of life tograsp the full measure of human stupidity. I've fought it all my life.

I'm very tired. . . ." The sincerity of his voice was genuine. He walkedslowly away from her. "There was a time when I looked at the tragic messthey've made of this earth, and I wanted to cry out, to beg them to listen—Icould teach them to live so much better than they did—but there was nobody tohear me, they had nothing to hear me with. . . .

Intelligence? It is such a rare, precarious spark that flashes for amoment somewhere among men, and vanishes. One cannot tell its nature, or itsfuture ... or its death. ..."

She made a movement to rise.

"Don't go, Miss Taggart. I'd like you to understand."

She raised her face to him, in obedient indifference. Her face was notpale, but its planes stood out with strangely naked precision, as if its skinhad lost the shadings of color.

"You're young," he said. "At your age, I had the same faith in theunlimited power of reason. The same brilliant vision of man as a rationalbeing. I have seen so much, since. I have been disillusioned so often. . . .I'd like to tell you just one story."

He stood at the window of his office. It had grown dark outside. Thedarkness seemed to rise from the black cut of the river, far below. A fewlights trembled in the water, from among the hills of the other shore. Thesky was still the intense blue of evening. A lonely star, low over the earth,seemed unnaturally large and made the sky look darker.

"When I was at the Patrick Henry University," he said, "I had threepupils. I have had many bright students in the past, but these three were-the kind of reward a teacher prays for. If ever you could wish to receive thegift of the human mind at its best, young and delivered into your hands forguidance, they were this gift. Theirs was the kind of intelligence oneexpects to see, in the future, changing the course of the world. They camefrom very different backgrounds, but they were inseparable friends. They madea strange choice of studies. They majored in two subjects—mine and HughAkston's. Physics and philosophy. It is not a combination of interests oneencounters nowadays. Hugh Akston was a distinguished man, a great mind . . .unlike the incredible creature whom that University has now put in his place.. . . Akston and I were a little jealous of each other over these threestudents. It was a kind of contest between us, a friendly contest, because weunderstood each other, I heard Akston saying one day that he regarded them ashis sons. I resented it a little . . . because I thought of them as mine. . .

He turned and looked at her. The bitter lines of age were visible now,cutting across his cheeks. He said, "When I endorsed the establishment ofthis Institute, one of these three damned me. I have not seen him since. Itused to disturb me, in the first few years. I wondered, once in a while,whether he had been right. ... It has ceased to disturb me, long ago."

He smiled. There was nothing but bitterness now, in his smile and hisface.

'These three men, these three who held all the hope which the gift ofintelligence ever proffered, these three from whom we expected such amagnificent future—one of them was Francisco d'Anconia, who became a depravedplayboy. Another was Ragnar Danneskjold, who became a plain bandit. So muchfor the promise of the human mind."

"Who was the third one?" she asked, He shrugged. "The third one did notachieve even that sort of notorious distinction. He vanished without a trace—into the great unknown of mediocrity. He is probably a second assistantbookkeeper somewhere."

"It's a lie! I didn't run away!" cried James Taggart. "I came here becauseI happened to be sick. Ask Dr. Wilson. It's a form of flu.

He'll prove it. And how did you know that I was here?"

Dagny stood in the middle of the room; there were melting snowflakes onher coat collar, on the brim of her hat. She glanced around, feeling anemotion that would have been sadness, had she had time to acknowledge it.

It was a room in the house of the old Taggart estate on the Hudson.

Jim had inherited the place, but he seldom came here. In their childhood,this had been their father's study. Now it had the desolate air of a roomwhich is used, yet uninhabited. There were slipcovers on all but two chairs,a cold fireplace and the dismal warmth of an electric heater with a cordtwisting across the floor, a desk, its glass surface empty.

Jim lay on the couch, with a towel wrapped for a scarf around his neck.She saw a stale, filled ashtray on a chair beside him, a bottle of whisky, awilted paper cup, and two-day-old newspapers scattered about the floor. Aportrait of their grandfather hung over the fireplace, full figure, with arailroad bridge in the fading background.

"I have no time for arguments, Jim."

"It was your idea! I hope you'll admit to the Board that it was your idea.That's what your goddamn Rearden Metal has done to us! If we had waited forOrren Boyle . . ." His unshaved face was pulled by a twisted scramble ofemotions: panic, hatred, a touch of triumph, the relief of screaming at avictim—and the faint, cautious, begging look that sees a hope of help.

He had stopped tentatively, but she did not answer. She stood watchinghim, her hands in the pockets of her coat.

"There's nothing we can do now!" he moaned. "I tried to call Washington,to get them to seize the Phoenix-Durango and turn it over to us, on theground of emergency, but they won't even discuss it! Too many peopleobjecting, they say, afraid of some fool precedent or another! ... I gotthe National Alliance of Railroads to suspend the deadline and permit DanConway to operate his road for another year —that would have given us time-but he's refused to do it! I tried to get Ellis Wyatt and his bunch offriends in Colorado to demand that Washington order Conway to continueoperations—but all of them, Wyatt and all the rest of those bastards,refused! It's their skin, worse than ours, they're sure to go down the drain-but they've refused!"

She smiled briefly, but made no comment.

"Now there's nothing left for us to do! We're caught. We can't give upthat branch and we can't complete it. We can't stop or go on. We have nomoney. Nobody will touch us with a ten-foot pole! What have we got leftwithout the Rio Norte Line? But we can't finish it. We'd be boycotted. We'dbe blacklisted. That union of track workers would sue us. They would, there'sa law about it. We can't complete that Line! Christ! What are we going todo?"

She waited. "Through, Jim?" she asked coldly. "If you are, I'll tell youwhat we're going to do."

He kept silent, looking up at her from under his heavy eyelids.

"This is not a proposal, Jim. It's an ultimatum. Just listen and accept. Iam going to complete the construction of the Rio Norte Line.

I personally, not Taggart Transcontinental. I will take a leave of absencefrom the job of Vice-President. I will form a company in my own name. YourBoard will turn the Rio None Line over to me. I will act as my owncontractor. I will get my own financing. I will take full charge and soleresponsibility. I will complete the Line on time. After you have seen how theRearden Metal rails can take it, I will transfer the Line back to TaggartTranscontinental and I'll return to my job. That is all,"

He was looking at her silently, dangling a bedroom slipper on the tip ofhis foot. She had never supposed that hope could look ugly in a man's face,but it did: it was mixed with cunning. She turned her eyes away from him,wondering how it was possible that a man's first thought in such a momentcould be a search for something to put over on her.

Then, preposterously, the first thing he said, his voice anxious, was,"But who will run Taggart Transcontinental in the meantime?"

She chuckled; the sound astonished her, it seemed old in its bitterness.

She said, "Eddie Willers."

"Oh no! He couldn't!"

She laughed, in the same brusque, mirthless way. "I thought you weresmarter than I about things of this kind. Eddie will assume the title ofActing Vice-President. He will occupy my office and sit at my desk.

But who do you suppose will run Taggart Transcontinental?"

"But I don't see how—"

"I will commute by plane between Eddie's office and Colorado. Also, thereare long-distance phones available. I will do just what I have been doing.Nothing will change, except the kind of show you will put on for your friends. . . and the fact that it will be a little harder for me."

"What show?"

"You understand me, Jim. I have no idea what sort of games you're tangledin, you and your Board of Directors. I don't know how many ends you're allplaying against the middle and against one another, or how many pretenses youhave to keep up in how many opposite directions. I don't know or care. Youcan all hide behind me.

If you're all afraid, because you've made deals with friends who'rethreatened by Rearden Metal—well, here's your chance to go through themotions of assuring them that you're not involved, that you're not doingthis—I am. You can help them to curse me and denounce me.

You can all stay home, take no risks and make no enemies. Just keep out ofmy way."

"Well . . ."he said slowly, "of course, the problems involved in thepolicy of a great railroad system are complex . . . while a small,independent company, in the name of one person, could afford to—"

"Yes, Jim, yes, I know all that. The moment you announce that you'returning the Rio Norte Line over to me, the Taggart stock will rise. Thebedbugs will stop crawling from out of unlikely corners, since they won'thave the incentive of a big company to bite. Before they decide what to doabout me, I will have the Line finished. And as for me, I don't want to haveyou and your Board to account to, to argue with, to beg permissions from.There isn't any time for that, if I am to do the kind of job that has to bedone. So I'm going to do it alone."

"And ... if you fail?"

"If I fail, I'll go down alone."

"You understand that in such case Taggart Transcontinental wilt not beable to help you in any way?""I understand."

"You will not count on us?""No. "

"You will cut all official connection with us, so that your activitieswill not reflect upon our reputation?""Yes."

"I think we should agree that in case of failure or public scandal . . .your leave of absence will become permanent . . . that is, you will notexpect to return to the post of Vice-President."

She closed her eyes for a moment. "All right, Jim. In such case, I willnot return."

"Before we transfer the Rio Norte Line to you, we must have a writtenagreement that you will transfer it back to us, along with your controllinginterest at cost, in case the Line becomes successful. Otherwise you mighttry to squeeze us for a windfall profit, since we need that Line."

There was only a brief stab of shock in her eyes, then she saidindifferently, the words sounding as if she were tossing alms, "By all means,Jim. Have that stated in writing."

"Now as to your temporary successor . . ."

"Yes?"

"You don't really want it to be Eddie Willers, do you?""Yes. I do."

"But he couldn't even act like a vice-president! He doesn't have thepresence, the manner, the—"

"He knows his work and mine. He knows what I want. I trust him.I'll be able to work with him."

"Don't you think it would be better to pick one of our more distinguishedyoung men, somebody from a good family, with more social poise and—""It's going to be Eddie Willers, Jim."

He sighed. "All right. Only . . . only we must be careful about it.

. . . We don't want people to suspect that it's you who're still runningTaggart Transcontinental. Nobody must know it."

"Everybody will know it, Jim. But since nobody will admit it openly,everybody will be satisfied."

"But we must preserve appearances."

"Oh, certainly! You don't have to recognize me on the street, if you don'twant to. You can say you've never seen me before and I'll say I've neverheard of Taggart Transcontinental."

He remained silent, trying to think, staring down at the floor.

She turned to look at the grounds beyond the window. The sky had the even,gray-white pallor of winter. Far below, on the shore of the Hudson, she sawthe road she used to watch for Francisco's car-she saw the cliff over the river, where they climbed to look for thetowers of New York—and somewhere beyond the woods were the trails that led toRockdale Station. The earth was snow-covered now, and what remained was likethe skeleton of the countryside she remembered—a thin design of bare branchesrising from the snow to the sky.

It was gray and white, like a photograph, a dead photograph which onekeeps hopefully for remembrance, but which has no power to bring backanything.

"What are you going to call it?"

She turned, startled. "What?"

"What are you going to call your company?"

"Oh . . . Why, the Dagny Taggart Line, I guess."

"But ... Do you think that's wise? It might be misunderstood.The Taggart might be taken as—"

"Well, what do you want me to call it?" she snapped, worn down to anger."The Miss Nobody? The Madam X? The John Gait?" She stopped. She smiled

suddenly, a cold, bright, dangerous smile. 'That's what I'm going to call it:the John Gait Line."

"Good God, no!"

"Yes."

"But it's . . . if s just a cheap piece of slang!"

"You can't make a joke out of such a serious project! . . . You can't beso vulgar and . . . and undignified!""Can't I?"

"But for God's sake, why?"

"Because it's going to shock all the rest of them just as it shocked you.""I've never seen you playing for effects.""I am, this time."

"But . . ." His voice dropped to an almost superstitious sound: "Look,Dagny, you know, it's . . . it's bad luck. . . . What it stands for is . . ."He stopped.

"What does it stand for?"

"I don't know . . . But the way people use it, they always seem to say itout of-"

"Fear? Despair? Futility?"

"Yes . . . yes, that's what it is."

"That's what I want to throw in their faces!"

The bright, sparkling anger in her eyes, her first look of enjoyment, madehim understand that he had to keep still.

"Draw up all the papers and all the red tape in the name of the John GaitLine," she said.

He sighed. "Well, it's your Line."

"You bet it is ! "

He glanced at her, astonished. She had dropped the manners and style of avice-president; she seemed to be relaxing happily to the level of yard crewsand construction gangs.

"As to the papers and the legal side of it," he said, "there might be somedifficulties. We would have to apply for the permission of—"

She whirled to face him. Something of the bright, violent look stillremained in her face. But it was not gay and she was not smiling. The looknow had an odd, primitive quality. When he saw it, he hoped he would neverhave to see it again.

"Listen, Jim," she said; he had never heard that tone in any human voice."There is one thing you can do as your part of the deal and you'd better doit: keep your Washington boys off. See to it that they give me all thepermissions, authorizations, charters and other waste paper that their lawsrequire. Don't let them try to stop me. If they try . . . Jim, people saythat our ancestor, Nat Taggart, killed a politician who tried to refuse him apermission he should never have had to ask. I don't know whether Nat Taggartdid it or not. But I'll tell you this: I know how he felt, if he did. If hedidn't—I might do the job for him, to complete the family legend. I mean it,Jim. "

Francisco d'Anconia sat in front of her desk. His face was blank. It hadremained blank while Dagny explained to him, in the clear, impersonal tone ofa business interview, the formation and purpose of her own railroad company.He had listened. He had not pronounced a word.

She had never seen his face wear that look of drained passivity.

There was no mockery, no amusement, no antagonism; it was as if he did notbelong in these particular moments of existence and could not be reached. Yethis eyes looked at her attentively; they seemed to see more than she couldsuspect; they made her think of one-way glass: they let all light rays in,but none out.

"Francisco, I asked you to come here, because I wanted you to see me in myoffice. You've never seen it. It would have meant something to you, once."

His eyes moved slowly to look at the office. Its walls were bare, exceptfor three things: a map of Taggart Transcontinental—the original drawing ofNat Taggart, that had served as model for his statue —and a large railroadcalendar, in cheerfully crude colors, the kind that was distributed eachyear, with a change of its picture, to every station along the Taggart track,the kind that had hung once in her first work place at Rockdale.

He got up. He said quietly, "Dagny, for your own sake, and"—it was abarely perceptible hesitation—"and in the name of any pity you might feel forme, don't request what you're going to request.

Don't. Let me go now."

This was not like him and like nothing she could ever have expected tohear from him. After a moment, she asked, "Why?"

"I can't answer you. I can't answer any questions. That is one of thereasons why it's best not to discuss it."

"You know what I am going to request?"

"Yes." The way she looked at him was such an eloquent, desperate question,that he had to add, "I know that I am going to refuse.""Why?"

He smiled mirthlessly, spreading his hands out, as if to show her thatthis was what he had predicted and had wanted to avoid.

She said quietly, "I have to try, Francisco. I have to make the request.That's my part. What you'll do about it is yours. But I'll know that I'vetried everything."

He remained standing, but he inclined his head a little, in assent, andsaid, "I will listen, if that will help you."

"I need fifteen million dollars to complete the Rio Norte Line, I haveobtained seven million against the Taggart stock I own free and clear. I canraise nothing else. I will issue bonds in the name of my new company, in theamount of eight million dollars. I called you here to ask you to buy thesebonds."

He did not answer.

"I am simply a beggar, Francisco, and I am begging you for money.

I had always thought that one did not beg in business. I thought that onestood on the merit of what one had to offer, and gave value for value. Thisis not so any more, though I don't understand how we can act on any otherrule and continue to exist. Judging by every objective fact, the Rio NorteLine is to be the best railroad in the country. Judging by every knownstandard, it is the best investment possible. And that is what damns me. Icannot raise money by offering people a good business venture: the fact thatit's good, makes people reject it. There is no bank that would buy the bondsof my company.

So I can't plead merit. I can only plead."

Her voice was pronouncing the words with impersonal precision. Shestopped, waiting for his answer. He remained silent.

"I know that I have nothing to offer you," she said. "I can't speak to youin terms of investment. You don't care to make money. Industrial projectshave ceased to concern you long ago. So I won't pretend that it's a fairexchange. It's just begging." She drew her breath and said, "Give me thatmoney as alms, because it means nothing to you."

"Don't," he said, his voice low. She could not tell whether the strangesound of it was pain or anger; his eyes were lowered.

"Will you do it, Francisco?"

"No. "

After a moment, she said, "I called you, not because I thought you wouldagree, but because you were the only one who could understand what I am

saying. So I had to try it." Her voice was dropping lower, as if she hoped itwould make emotion harder to detect. "You see, I can't believe that you'rereally gone . . . because I know that you're still able to hear me. The wayyou live is depraved. But the way you act is not. Even the way you speak ofit, is not. ... I had to try . . .

But I can't struggle to understand you any longer."

"I'll give you a hint. Contradictions do not exist. Whenever you thinkthat you are facing a contradiction, check your premises. You will find thatone of them is wrong."

"Francisco," she whispered, "why don't you tell me what it was thathappened to you?"

"Because, at this moment, the answer would hurt you more than the doubt.""Is it as terrible as that?"

"It is an answer which you must reach by yourself."

She shook her head. "I don't know what to offer you. I don't know what isof value to you any longer. Don't you see that even a beggar has to givevalue in return, has to offer some reason why you might want to help him? . .. Well, I thought ... at one time, it meant a great deal to you—success.Industrial success. Remember how we used to talk about it? You were verysevere. You expected a lot from me.

You told me I'd better live up to it. I have. You wondered how far I'drise with Taggart Transcontinental." She moved her hand, pointing at theoffice. "This is how far I've risen. . . . So I thought ... if the memoryof what had been your values still has some meaning for you, if only asamusement, or a moment's sadness, or just like . . . like putting flowers ona grave . . . you might want to give me the money ... in the name of that."

"No. "

She said, with effort, "That money would mean nothing to you—you've wastedthat much on senseless parties—you've wasted much more on the San SebastianMines—"

He glanced up. He looked straight at her and she saw the first spark of aliving response in his eyes, a look that was bright, pitiless and,incredibly, proud: as if this were an accusation that gave him strength.

"Oh, yes," she said slowly, as if answering his thought, "I realize that.I've damned you for those mines, I've denounced you, I've thrown my contemptat you in every way possible, and now I come back to you—for money. Like Jim,like any moocher you've ever met. I know it's a triumph for you, I know thatyou can laugh at me and despise me with full justice. Well—perhaps I canoffer you that. If it's amusement that you want, if you enjoyed seeing Jimand the Mexican planners crawl—wouldn't it amuse you to break me? Wouldn't itgive you pleasure? Don't you want to hear me acknowledge that I'm beaten byyou? Don't you want to see me crawling before you? Tell me what form of ityou'd like and I'll submit."

He moved so swiftly that she could not notice how he started; it onlyseemed to her that his first movement was a shudder. He came around the desk,he took her hand and raised it to his lips. It began as a gesture of thegravest respect, as if its purpose were to give her strength; but as he heldhis lips, then his face, pressed to her hand, she knew that he was seekingstrength from it himself.

He dropped her hand, he looked down at her face, at the frightenedstillness of her eyes, he smiled, not trying to hide that his smile heldsuffering, anger and tenderness.

"Dagny, you want to crawl? You don't know what the word means and neverwill. One doesn't crawl by acknowledging it as honestly as that. Don't yousuppose I know that your begging me was the bravest thing you could do? But .. . Don't ask me, Dagny."

"In the name of anything I ever meant to you . . ." she whispered,"anything left within you . . ."

In the moment when she thought that she had seen this look before, thatthis was the way he had looked against the night glow of the city, when helay in bed by her side for the last time—she heard his cry, the kind of cryshe had never torn from him before: "My love, I can't!"

Then, as they looked at each other, both shocked into silence byastonishment, she saw the change in his face. It was as crudely abrupt as ifhe had thrown a switch. He laughed, he moved away from her and said, hisvoice jarringly offensive by being completely casual: "Please excuse themixture in styles of expression. I've been supposed to say that to so manywomen, but on somewhat different occasions."

Her head dropped, she sat huddled tight together, not caring that he saw

it.

When she raised her head, she looked at him indifferently. "All right,Francisco. It was a good act. I did believe it. If that was your own way ofhaving the kind of fun I was offering you, you succeeded.

I won't ask you for anything."

"I warned you."

"I didn't know which side you belonged on. It didn't seem possible —butit's the side of Orren Boyle and Bertram Scudder and your old teacher.""My old teacher?" he asked sharply."Dr. Robert Stadler."

He chuckled, relieved. "Oh, that one? He's the looter who thinks that hisend justifies his seizure of my means." He added, "You know, Dagny, I'd likeyou to remember which side you said I'm on. Some day, I'll remind you of itand ask you whether you'll want to repeat it."

"You won't have to remind me."

He turned to go. He tossed his hand in a casual salute and said, "If itcould be built, I'd wish good luck to the Rio Norte Line."

"It's going to be built. And it's going to be called the John Gait Line.""What?!"

It was an actual scream; she chuckled derisively. "The John Gait Line.""Dagny, in heaven's name, why?""Don't you like it?"

"How did you happen to choose that?"

"It sounds better than Mr. Nemo or Mr. Zero, doesn't it?"

"Dagny, why that?"

"Because it frightens you."

"What do you think it stands for?"

"The impossible. The unattainable. And you're all afraid of my Line justas you're afraid of that name."

He started laughing. He laughed, not looking at her, and she feltstrangely certain that he had forgotten her, that he was far away, that hewas laughing—in furious gaiety and bitterness—at something in which she hadno part.

When he turned to her, he said earnestly, "Dagny, I wouldn't, if I wereyou. "

She shrugged. "Jim didn't like it, either.""What do you like about it?"

"I hate it! I hate the doom you're all waiting for, the giving up, andthat senseless question that always sounds like a cry for help. I'm sick ofhearing pleas for John Gait. I'm going to fight him."

He said quietly, "You are."

"I'm going to build a railroad line for him. Let him come and claim it!"He smiled sadly and nodded: "He will."

The glow of poured steel streamed across the ceiling and broke against onewall. Rearden sat at his desk, in the light of a single lamp. Beyond itscircle, the darkness of the office blended with the darkness outside. He feltas if it were empty space where the rays of the furnaces moved at will; as ifthe desk were a raft hanging in mid-air, holding two persons imprisoned inprivacy. Dagny sat in front of his desk.

She had thrown her coat off, and she sat outlined against it, a slim,tense body in a gray suit, leaning diagonally across the wide armchair.

Only her hand lay in the light, on the edge of the desk; beyond it, he sawthe pale suggestion of her face, the white of a blouse, the triangle of anopen collar.

"All right, Hank," she said, "we're going ahead with a new Rearden Metalbridge. This is the official order of the official owner of the John GaitLine."

He smiled, looking down at the drawings of the bridge spread in the lighton his desk. "Have you had a chance to examine the scheme we submitted?""Yes. You don't need my comments or compliments. The order says it.""Very well. Thank you. I'll start rolling the Metal"

"Don't you want to ask whether the John Gait Line is in a position toplace orders or to function?"

"I don't need to. Your coming here says it,"

She smiled. "True. It's all set, Hank. I came to tell you that and todiscuss the details of the bridge in person."

"All right, I am curious: who are the bondholders of the John Gait Line?"

"I don't think any of them could afford it. All of them have growingenterprises. All of them needed their money for their own concerns.

But they needed the Line and they did not ask anyone for help." She took apaper out of her bag. "Here's John Gait, Inc.," she said, handing it acrossthe desk.

He knew most of the names on the list: "Ellis.. Wyatt, Wyatt Oil,Colorado. Ted Nielsen, Nielsen Motors, Colorado. Lawrence Hammond, HammondCars, Colorado. Andrew Stockton, Stockton Foundry, Colorado." There were afew from other states; he noticed the name: "Kenneth Danagger, Danagger Coal,Pennsylvania." The amounts of their subscriptions varied, from sums in fivefigures to six.

He reached for his fountain pen, wrote at the bottom of the list "HenryRearden, Rearden Steel, Pennsylvania—$ 1, 000, 000" and tossed the list back toher.

"Hank," she said quietly, "I didn't want you- in on this. You've investedso much in Rearden Metal that it's worse for you than for any of us. Youcan't afford another risk."

"I never accept favors," he answered coldly.

"What do you mean?"

"I don't ask people to take greater chances on my ventures than I takemyself. If it's a gamble, I'll match anybody's gambling. Didn't you say thatthat track was my first showcase?"

She inclined her head and said gravely, "All right. Thank you."

"Incidentally, I don't expect to lose this money. I am aware of theconditions under which these bonds can be converted into stock at my option.I therefore expect to make an inordinate profit—and you're going to earn itfor me."

She laughed. "God, Hank, I've spoken to so many yellow fools that they'vealmost infected me into thinking of the Line as of a hopeless loss! Thanksfor reminding me. Yes, I think I'll earn your inordinate profit for you."

"If it weren't for the yellow fools, there wouldn't be any risk in it atall. But we have to beat them. We will." He reached for two telegrams from

among the papers on his desk. "There are still a few men in existence." Heextended the telegrams. "I think you'd like to see these."

One of them read: "I had intended to undertake it in two years, but thestatement of the State Science Institute compels me to proceed at once.Consider this a commitment for the construction of a 12inch pipe line ofRearden Metal, 600 miles, Colorado to Kansas City.

Details follow. Ellis Wyatt."

The other read: "Re our discussion of my order. Go ahead. Ken Danagger."He added, in explanation, "He wasn't prepared to proceed at once, either.It's eight thousand tons of Rearden Metal. Structural metal.For coal mines."

They glanced at each other and smiled. They needed no further comment.

He glanced down, as she handed the telegrams back to him. The skin of herhand looked transparent in the light, on the edge of his desk, a young girl'shand with long, thin fingers, relaxed for a moment, defenseless.

"The Stockton Foundry in Colorado," she said, "is going to finish thatorder for me—the one that the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company ran outon. They're going to get in touch with you about the Metal."

"They have already. What have you done about the construction crews?"

"Nealy's engineers are staying on, the best ones, those I need. And mostof the foremen, too. It won't be too hard to keep them going.

Nealy wasn't of much use, anyway."

"What about labor?"

"More applicants than I can hire. I don't think the union is going tointerfere. Most of the applicants are giving phony names. They're unionmembers. They need the work desperately. I'll have a few guards on the Line,but I don't expect any trouble."

"What about your brother Jim's Board of Directors?"

"They're all scrambling to get statements into the newspapers to theeffect that they have no connection whatever with the John Gait Line and howreprehensible an undertaking they think it is. They agreed to everything Iasked."

The line of her shoulders looked taut, yet thrown back easily, as ifpoised for flight. Tension seemed natural to her, not a sign of anxiety, buta sign of enjoyment; the tension of her whole body, under the gray suit,half-visible in the darkness, "Eddie Willers has taken over the office ofOperating Vice-President, "

she said. "If you need anything, get in touch with him. I'm leaving forColorado tonight."

"Tonight?"

"Yes. We have to make up time. We've lost a week.""Flying your own plane?"

"Yes. I'll be back in about ten days, I intend to be in New York once ortwice a month."

"Where will you live out there?"

"On the site. In my own railway car—that is, Eddie's car, which I'mborrowing."

"Will you be safe?"

"Safe from what?" Then she laughed, startled. "Why, Hank, it's the firsttime you've ever thought that I wasn't a man. Of coarse I'll be safe."

He was not looking at her; he was looking at a sheet of figures on hisdesk. "I've had my engineers prepare a breakdown of the cost of the bridge,"he said, "and an approximate schedule of the construction time required. Thatis what I wanted to discuss with you." He extended the papers. She settledback to read them.

A wedge of light fell across her face. He saw the firm, sensual mouth insharp outline. Then she leaned back a little, and he saw only a suggestion ofits shape and the dark lines of her lowered lashes.

Haven't I?—he thought. Haven't I thought of it since the first time I sawyou? Haven't I thought of nothing else for two years? ... He satmotionless, looking at her. He heard the words he had never allowed himselfto form, the words he had felt, known, yet had not faced, had hoped todestroy by never letting them be said within his own mind. Now it was assudden and shocking as if he were saying it to her. . . . Since the firsttime I saw you . . . Nothing but your body, that mouth of yours, and the wayyour eyes would look at me, if . . . Through every sentence I ever said toyou, through every conference you thought so safe, through the importance ofall the issues we discussed . . . You trusted me, didn't you? To recognizeyour greatness? To think of you as you deserved—as if you were a man?

. . . Don't you suppose I know how much I've betrayed? The only brightencounter of my life—the only person I respected—the best businessman I know—my ally—my partner in a desperate battle . . .

The lowest of all desires—as my answer to the highest I've met . . .

Do you know what I am? I thought of it, because it should have beenunthinkable. For that degrading need, which should never touch you, I havenever wanted anyone but you ... I hadn't known what it was like, to wantit, until I saw you for the first time. I had thought: Not I, I couldn't bebroken by it . . . Since then . . . for two years . . . with not a moment'srespite ... Do you know what it's like, to want it? Would you wish to hearwhat I thought when I looked at you . . . when I lay awake at night . . .when I heard your voice over a telephone wire . . . when I worked, but couldnot drive it away?

. . . To bring you down to things you can't conceive—and to know that it'sI who have done it. To reduce you to a body, to teach you an animal'spleasure, to see you need it, to see you asking me for it, to see yourwonderful spirit dependent upon the obscenity of your need. To watch you asyou are, as you face the world with your clean, proud strength—then to seeyou, in my bed, submitting to any infamous whim I may devise, to any actwhich I'll perform for the sole purpose of watching your dishonor and towhich you'll submit for the sake of an unspeakable sensation ... I wantyou—and may I be damned for it! . . .

She was reading the papers, leaning back in the darkness—he saw thereflection of the fire touching her hair, moving to her shoulder, down herarm, to the naked skin of her wrist.

. . . Do you know what I'm thinking now, in this moment? . . .Your gray suit and your open collar . . . you look so young, so austere,so sure of yourself . . . What would you be like if I knocked your head back,if I threw you down in that formal suit of yours, if I raised your skirt-She glanced up at him. He looked down at the papers on his desk.In a moment, he said, "The actual cost of the bridge is less than ouroriginal estimate. You will note that the strength of the bridge allows forthe eventual addition of a second track, which, I think, that section of thecountry will justify in a very few years. If you spread the cost over aperiod of—"

He spoke, and she looked at his face in the lamplight, against the blackemptiness of the office. The lamp was outside her field of vision, and shefelt as if it were his face that illuminated the papers on the desk. Hisface, she thought, and the cold, radiant clarity of his voice, of his mind,of Ms drive to a single purpose. The face was like his words—as if the lineof a single theme ran from the steady glance of the eyes, through the gauntmuscles of the cheeks, to the faintly scornful, downward curve of the mouth—the line of a ruthless asceticism.

The day began with the news of a disaster: a freight train of the AtlanticSouthern had crashed head-on into a passenger train, in New Mexico, on asharp curve in the mountains, scattering freight cars all over the slopes.The cars carried five thousand tons of copper, bound from a mine in Arizonato the Rearden mills, Rearden telephoned the general manager of the AtlanticSouthern, but the answer he received was: "Oh God, Mr. Rearden, how can wetell? How can anybody tell how long it will take to clear that wreck?

One of the worst we've ever had ... I don't know, Mr. Rearden.

There are no other lines anywhere in that section. The track is torn fortwelve hundred feet. There's been a rockslide. Our wrecking train can't getthrough. I don't know how we'll ever get those freight cars back on rails, orwhen. Can't expect it sooner than two weeks . . .

Three days? Impossible, Mr. Rearden! . . . But we can't help it!

. . . But surely you can tell your customers that it's an act of God!

What if you do hold them up? Nobody can blame you in a case of this kind!"

In the next two hours, with the assistance of his secretary, two youngengineers from his shipping department, a road map, and the long-distancetelephone, Rearden arranged for a fleet of trucks to proceed to the scene ofthe wreck, and for a chain of hopper cars to meet them at the nearest stationof the Atlantic Southern. The hopper cars had been borrowed from TaggartTranscontinental. The trucks had been recruited from all over New Mexico,Arizona and Colorado. Rearden's engineers had hunted by telephone for privatetruck owners and had offered payments that cut all arguments short.

It was the third of three shipments of copper that Rearden. had expected;two orders had not been delivered: one company had gone out of business, theother was still pleading delays that it could not help.

He had attended to the matter without breaking his chain of appointments,without raising his voice, without sign of strain, uncertainty orapprehension; he had acted with the swift precision of a military commanderunder sudden fire—and Gwen Ives, his secretary, had acted as his calmestlieutenant. She was a girl in her late twenties, whose quietly harmonious,impenetrable face had a quality matching the best designed office equipment;she was one of his most ruthlessly competent employees; her manner ofperforming her duties suggested the kind of rational cleanliness that wouldconsider any element of emotion, while at work, as an unpardonableimmorality.

When the emergency was over, her sole comment was, "Mr. Rearden, I thinkwe should ask all our suppliers to ship via Taggart Transcontinental." "I'mthinking that, too," he answered; then added, "Wire Fleming in Colorado. Tellhim I'm taking an option on that copper mine property."

He was back at his desk, speaking to his superintendent on one phone andto his purchasing manager on another, checking every date and ton of ore onhand—he could not leave to chance or to another person the possibility of asingle hour's delay in the flow of a furnace: it was the last of the rail forthe John Gait Line that was being poured—when the buzzer rang and Miss Ives'voice announced that his mother was outside, demanding to see him.

He had asked his family never to come to the mills without appointment. Hehad been glad that they hated the place and seldom appeared in his office.What he now felt was a violent impulse to order his mother off the premises.Instead, with a greater effort than the problem of the train wreck hadrequired of him, he said quietly, "All right. Ask her to come in."

His mother came in with an air of belligerent defensiveness. She looked athis office as if she knew what it meant to him and as if she were declaringher resentment against anything being of greater importance to him than herown person. She took a long time settling down in an armchair, arranging andrearranging her bag, her gloves, the folds of her dress, while droning, "It's

a fine thing when a mother has to wait in an anteroom and ask permission of astenographer before she's allowed to see her own son who—"

"Mother, is it anything important? I am very rushed today."

"You're not the only one who's got problems. Of course, it's important. Doyou think I'd go to the trouble of driving wayout here, if it wasn't important?""What is it?""It's about Philip.""Yes?"

"Philip is unhappy.""Well?"

"He feels it's not right that he should have to depend on your charity andlive on handouts and never be able to count on a single dollar of his own."

"Well!" he said with a startled smile. "I've been waiting for him torealize that."

"It isn't right for a sensitive man to be in such a position.""It certainly isn't."

"I'm glad you agree with me. So what you have to do is give him a job.""A . . . what?"

"You must give him a job, here, at the mills—but a nice, clean job, ofcourse, with a desk and an office and a decent salary, where he wouldn't haveto be among your day laborers and your smelly furnaces."

He knew that he was hearing it; he could not make himself believe it."Mother, you're not serious."

"I certainly am. I happen to know that that's what he wants, only 's tooproud to ask you for it But if you offer it to him and make it look like it'syou who're asking him a favor—why, I know he'd be happy to take it. That'swhy I had to come here to talk to you—so he wouldn't guess that I put you upto it."

It was not in the nature of his consciousness to understand the nature ofthe things he was hearing. A single thought cut through his mind like aspotlight, making him unable to conceive how any eyes could miss it. Thethought broke out of him as a cry of bewilderment: "But he knows nothingabout the steel business!"

"What has that got to do with it? He needs a job."

"But he couldn't do the work."

"He needs to gain self-confidence and to feel important.""But he wouldn't be any good whatever.""He needs to feel that he's wanted.""Here? What could I want him for?""You hire plenty of strangers."

"I hire men who produce. What has he got to offer?""He's your brother, isn't he?""What has that got to do with it?"

She stared incredulously, in turn, silenced by shock. For a moment, theysat looking at each other, as if across an interplanetary distance.

"He's your brother," she said, her voice like a phonograph recordrepeating a magic formula she could not permit herself to doubt. "He needs aposition in the world. He needs a salary, so that he'd feel that he's gotmoney coming to him as his due, not as alms."

"As his due? But he wouldn't be worth a nickel to me."

"Is that what you think of first? Your profit? I'm asking you to help yourbrother, and you're figuring how to make a nickel on him, and you won't helphim unless there's money in it for you—is that it?"

She saw the expression of his eyes, and she looked away, but spokehastily, her voice rising. "Yes, sure, you're helping him—like you'd help anystray beggar. Material help—that's all you know or understand. Have you

thought about his spiritual needs and what his position is doing to his self-respect? He doesn't want to live like a beggar. He wants to be independent ofyou. "

"By means of getting from me a salary he can't earn for work he can't do?""You'd never miss it. You've got enough people here who're making moneyfor you."

"Are you asking me to help him stage a fraud of that kind?""You don't have to put it that way.""Is it a fraud-or isn't it?"

"That's why I can't talk to you—because you're not human. You have nopity, no feeling for your brother, no compassion for his feelings.""Is it a fraud or not?""You have no mercy for anybody."

"Do you think that a fraud of this kind would be just?"

"You're the most immoral man living—you think of nothing but justice! Youdon't feel any love at all!"

He got up, his movement abrupt and stressed, the movement of ending aninterview and ordering a visitor out of his office. "Mother, I'm running asteel plant—not a whorehouse."

"Henry!" The gasp of indignation was at his choice of language, nothingmore.

"Don't ever speak to me again about a job for Philip. I would not give himthe job of a cinder sweeper. I would not allow him inside my mills. I wantyou to understand that, once and for all. You may try to help him in any wayyou wish, but don't ever let me see you thinking of my mills as a means tothat end."

The wrinkles of her soft chin trickled into a shape resembling a sneer."What are they, your mills—a holy temple of some kind?"

"Why . . . yes," he said softly, astonished at the thought.

"Don't you ever think of people and of your moral duties?"

"I don't know what it is that you choose to call morality. No, I don'tthink of people—except that if I gave a job to Philip, I wouldn't be able toface any competent man who needed work and deserved it."

She got up. Her head was drawn into her shoulders, and the righteousbitterness of her voice seemed to push the words upward at his tall, straightfigure: "That's your cruelty, that's what's mean and selfish about you. Ifyou loved your brother, you'd give him a job he didn't deserve, preciselybecause he didn't deserve it—that would be true love and kindness andbrotherhood. Else what's love for? If a man deserves a job, there's no virtuein giving it to him. Virtue is the giving of the undeserved."

He was looking at her like a child at an unfamiliar nightmare, incredulitypreventing it from becoming horror. "Mother," he said slowly, "you don't knowwhat you're saying. I'm not able ever to despise you enough to believe thatyou mean it"

The look on her face astonished him more than all the rest: it was a lookof defeat and yet of an odd, sly, cynical cunning, as if, for a moment, sheheld some worldly wisdom that mocked his innocence.

The memory of that look remained in his mind, like a warning signaltelling him that he had glimpsed an issue which he had to understand.

But he could not grapple with it, he could not force his mind to accept itas worthy of thought, he could find no clue except his dim uneasiness and hisrevulsion—and he had no time to give it, he could not think of it now, he wasfacing his next caller seated in front of his desk—he was listening to a manwho pleaded for his life.

The man did not state it in such terms, but Rearden knew that that was theessence of the case. What the man put into words was only a a for fivehundred tons of steel.

He was Mr. Ward, of the Ward Harvester Company of Minnesota.

It was an unpretentious company with an unblemished reputation, the kindof business concern that seldom grows large, but never fails. Mr.

Ward represented the fourth generation of a family that had owned theplant and had given it the conscientious best of such ability as theypossessed.

He was a man in his fifties, with a square, stolid face. Looking at him,one knew that he would consider it as indecent to let his face show sufferingas to remove his clothes in public. He spoke in a dry, businesslike manner.He explained that he had always dealt, as his father had, with one of thesmall steel companies now taken over by Orren Boyle's Associated Steel. Hehad waited for his last order of steel for a year. He had spent the lastmonth struggling to obtain a personal interview with Rearden.

"I know that your mills are running at capacity, Mr. Rearden," he said,"and I know that you are not in a position to take care of new orders, whatwith your biggest, oldest customers having to wait their turn, you being theonly decent—I mean, reliable—steel manufacturer left in the country. I don'tknow what reason to offer you as to why you should want to make an exceptionin my case. But there was nothing else for me to do, except close the doorsof my plant for good, and I"—

there was a slight break in his voice—"I can't quite see my way to closingthe doors ... as yet . . . so I thought I'd speak to you, even if I didn'thave much chance . . . still, I had to try everything possible."

This was language that Rearden could understand, "I wish I could help youout," he said, "but this is the worst possible time for me, because of a verylarge, very special order that has to take precedence over everything."

"I know. But would you just give me a hearing, Mr. Rearden?"

"Sure."

"If it's a question of money, I'll pay anything you ask. If I could makeit worth your while that way, why, charge me any extra you please, charge medouble the regular price, only let me have the steel.

I wouldn't care if I had to sell the harvester at a loss this year, justso I could keep the doors open. I've got enough, personally, to run at a lossfor a couple of years, if necessary, just to hold out—because, I figure,things can't go on this way much longer, conditions are bound to improve,they've got to or else we'll—" He did not finish. He said firmly, "They'vegot to."

"They will," said Rearden.

The thought of the John Gait Line ran through his mind like a harmonyunder the confident sound of his words. The John Gait Line was movingforward. The attacks on his Metal had ceased. He felt as if, miles apartacross the country, he and Dagny Taggart now stood in empty space, their waycleared, free to finish the job. They'll leave us alone to do it, he thought.The words were like a battle hymn in his mind: They'll leave us alone.

"Our plant capacity is one thousand harvesters per year," said Mr.

Ward. "Last year, we put out three hundred. I scraped the steel togetherfrom bankruptcy sales, and begging a few tons here and there from bigcompanies, and just going around like a scavenger to all sorts of unlikelyplaces—well, I won't bore you with that, only I never thought I'd live to seethe time when I'd have to do business that way.

And all the while Mr. Orren Boyle was swearing to me that he was going todeliver the steel next week. But whatever he managed to pour, it went to newcustomers of his, for some reason nobody would mention, only I heard itwhispered that they were men with some sort of political pull. And now Ican't even get to Mr. Boyle at all.

He's in Washington, been there for over a month. And all his office tellsme is just that they can't help it, because they can't get the ore."

"Don't waste your time on them," said Rearden. "You'll never get anythingfrom that outfit."

"You know, Mr. Rearden," he said in the tone of a discovery which he couldnot quite bring himself to believe, "I think there's something phony aboutthe way Mr. Boyle runs his business. I can't understand what he's after.They've got half their furnaces idle, but last month there were all those bigstories about Associated Steel in all the newspapers. About their output?Why, no—about the wonderful housing project that Mr. Boyle's just built forhis workers. Last week, it was colored movies that Mr. Boyle sent to all thehigh schools, showing how steel is made and what great service it performsfor everybody.

Now Mr. Boyle's got a radio program, they give talks about the importanceof the steel industry to the country and they keep saying that we mustpreserve the steel industry as a whole. I don't understand what he means byit as a whole."

"I do. Forget it. He won't get away with it."

"You know, Mr. Rearden, I don't like people who talk too much about howeverything they do is just for the sake of others. It's not true, and I don'tthink it would be right if it ever were true. So I'll say that what I needthe steel for is to save my own business. Because it's mine. Because if I hadto close it ... oh well, nobody understands that nowadays."

"I do."

"Yes . . . Yes, I think you would. . . . So, you see, that's my firstconcern. But still, there are my customers, too. They've dealt with me foryears. They're counting on me. It's just about impossible to get any sort ofmachinery anywhere. Do you know what it's getting to be like, out inMinnesota, when the farmers can't get tools, when machine break down in themiddle of the harvest season and there are no parts, no replacements . . .nothing but Mr. Orren Boyle's colored movies about . . . Oh well . . . Andthen there are my workers, too. Some of them have been with us since myfather's time. They've got no other place to go. Not now."

It was impossible, thought Rearden, to squeeze more steel out of millswhere every furnace, every hour and every ton were scheduled in advance forurgent orders, for the next six months. But . . . The John Gait Line, hethought. If he could do that, he could do anything.

- . . He felt as if he wished to undertake ten new problems at once.

He felt as if this were a world where nothing was impossible to him.

"Look," he said, reaching for the telephone, "let me check with mysuperintendent and see just what we're pouring in the next few weeks.

Maybe I'll find a way to borrow a few tons from some of the orders and—"

Mr. Ward looked quickly away from him, but Rearden had caught a glimpse ofhis face. It's so much for him, thought Rearden, and so little for me!

He lifted the telephone receiver, but he had to drop it, because the doorof his office flew open and Gwen Ives rushed in.

It seemed impossible that Miss Ives should permit herself a breach of thatkind, or that the calm of her face should look like an unnatural distortion,or that her eyes should seem blinded, or that her steps should sound a shredof discipline away from staggering. She said, "Excuse me for interrupting,Mr. Rearden," but he knew that she did not see the office, did not see Mr.Ward, saw nothing but him. "I thought I must tell you that the Legislaturehas just passed the Equalization of Opportunity Bill."

It was the stolid Mr. Ward who screamed, "Oh God, no! Oh, no!"—

staring at Rearden.

Rearden had leaped to his feet. He stood unnaturally bent, one shoulderdrooping forward. It was only an instant. Then he looked around him, as ifregaining eyesight, said, "Excuse me, " his glance including both Miss Ivesand Mr. Ward, and sat down again.

"We were not informed that the Bill had been brought to the floor, werewe?" he asked, his voice controlled and dry.

"No, Mr. Rearden. Apparently, it was a surprise move and it took them justforty-five minutes."

"Have you heard from Mouch?"

"No, Mr. Rearden." She stressed the no. "It was the office boy from thefifth floor who came running in to tell me that he'd just heard it on theradio. I called the newspapers to verify it. I tried to reach Mr.

Mouch in Washington. His office does not answer."

"When did we hear from him last?"

"Ten days ago, Mr. Rearden."

"All right. Thank you, Gwen. Keep trying to get his office.""Yes, Mr. Rearden."

She walked out. Mr. Ward was on his feet, hat in hand. He muttered, "Iguess I'd better—"

"Sit down!" Rearden snapped fiercely.Mr. Ward obeyed, staring at him.

"We had business to transact, didn't we?" said Rearden. Mr. Ward could notdefine the emotion that contorted Rearden's mouth as he spoke. "Mr. Ward,what is it that the foulest bastards on earth denounce us for, among otherthings? Oh yes, for our motto of 'Business as usual.' Well—business as usual,Mr. Ward!"

He picked up the telephone receiver and asked for his superintendent."Say, Pete . . . What? . . . Yes, I've heard. Can it. We'll talk about thatlater. What I want to know is, could you let me have five hundred tons ofsteel, extra, above schedule, in the next few weeks?

. . . Yes, I know ... I know it's tough. . . . Give me the dates and thefigures." He listened, rapidly jotting notes down on a sheet of paper. Thenhe said, "Right. Thank you," and hung up.

He studied the figures for a few moments, marking some brief calculationson the margin of the sheet. Then he raised his head.

"All right, Mr. Ward," he said. "You will have your steel in ten days."

When Mr. Ward had gone, Rearden came out into the anteroom.

He said to Miss Ives, his voice normal, "Wire Fleming in Colorado.

He'll know why I have to cancel that option." She inclined her head, inthe manner of a nod signifying obedience. She did not look at him.

He turned to his next caller and said, with a gesture of invitation towardhis office, "How do you do. Come in."

He would think of it later, he thought; one moves step by step and onemust keep moving. For the moment, with an unnatural clarity, with a brutalsimplification that made it almost easy, his consciousness contained nothingbut one thought: It must not stop me. The sentence hung alone, with no pastand no future. He did not think of what it was that must not stop him, or whythis sentence was such a crucial absolute. It held him and he obeyed. He wentstep by step. He completed his schedule of appointments, as scheduled.

It was late when his last caller departed and he came out of his office.The rest of his staff had gone home. Miss Ives sat alone at her desk in anempty room. She sat straight and stiff, her hands clasped tightly together inher lap. Her head was not lowered, but held rigidly level, and her faceseemed frozen. Tears were running down her cheeks, with no sound, with nofacial movement, against her resistance, beyond control.

She saw him and said dryly, guiltily, in apology, "I'm sorry, Mr.

Rearden," not attempting the futile pretense of hiding her face.

He approached her. "Thank you," he said gently.

She looked up at him, astonished.

He smiled. "But don't you think you're underestimating me, Gwen?Isn't it too soon to cry over me?"

"I could have taken the rest of it," she whispered, "but they"—she pointedat the newspapers on her desk—"they're calling it a victory for anti-greed."

He laughed aloud. "I can see where such a distortion of the Englishlanguage would make you furious," he said. "But what else?"

As she looked at him, her mouth relaxed a little. The victim whom shecould not protect was her only point of reassurance in a world dissolvingaround her.

He moved his hand gently across her forehead; it was an unusual break offormality for him, and a silent acknowledgment of the things at which he hadnot laughed. "Go home, Gwen. I won't need you tonight. I'm going home myselfin just a little while. No, I don't want you to wait."

It was past midnight, when, still sitting at his desk, bent overblueprints of the bridge for the John Gait Line, he stopped his workabruptly, because emotion reached him in a sudden stab, not to be escaped anylonger, as if a curtain of anesthesia had broken, He slumped down, halfway,still holding onto some shred of resistance, and sat, his chest pressed tothe edge of the desk to stop him, his head hanging down, as if the onlyachievement still possible to him was not to let his head drop down on thedesk. He sat that way for a few moments, conscious of nothing but pain, ascreaming pain without content or limit—he sat, not knowing whether it was inhis mind or his body, reduced to the terrible ugliness of pain that stoppedthought.

In a few moments, it was over. He raised his head and sat up straight,quietly, leaning back against his chair. Now he saw that in postponing thismoment for hours, he had not been guilty of evasion: he had not thought ofit, because there was nothing to think.

Thought—he told himself quietly—is a weapon one uses in order to act. Noaction was possible. Thought is the tool by which one makes a choice. Nochoice was left to him. Thought sets one's purpose and the way to reach it.In the matter of his life being torn piece by piece out of him, he was tohave no voice, no purpose, no way, no defense.

He thought of this in astonishment. He saw for the first time that he hadnever known fear because, against any disaster, he had held the omnipotentcure of being able to act. No, he thought, not an assurance of victory—whocan ever have that?—only the chance to act, which is all one needs. Now hewas contemplating, impersonally and for the first time, the real heart ofterror: being delivered to destruction with one's hands tied behind one'sback.

Well, then, go on with your hands tied, he thought. Go on in chains.Go on. It must not stop you. . . . But another voice was telling him

things he did not want to hear, while he fought back, crying through and

against it: There's no point in thinking of that . . . there's no use . . .

what for? . . . leave it alone!

He could not choke it off. He sat still, over the drawings of the bridge

for the John Gait Line, and heard the things released by a voice that was

part-sound, part-sight: They decided it without him.

. . . They did not call for him, they did not ask, they did not let him

speak. . . . They were not bound even by the duty to let him know-to let him know that they had slashed part of his life away and that he

had to be ready to walk on as a cripple. ... Of ah" those concerned,

whoever they were, for whichever reason, for whatever need, he was the one

they had not had to consider.

The sign at the end of a long road said: Rearden Ore. It hung over black

tiers of metal . . . and over years and nights . . . over a clock ticking

drops of his blood away . . . the blood he had given gladly, exultantly in

payment for a distant day and a sign over a road . . paid for with his

effort, his strength, his mind, his hope.

Destroyed at the whim of some men who sat and voted . . . Who knows bywhat minds? . . . Who knows whose will had placed them in power?—

what motive moved them?—what was their knowledge?—which one of them,unaided, could bring a chunk of ore out of the earth? . . . Destroyed at thewhim of men whom he had never seen and who had never seen those tiers ofmetal . . . Destroyed, because they so decided. By what right?

He shook his head. There are things one must not contemplate, he thought.There is an obscenity of evil which contaminates the observer.

There is a limit to what it is proper for a man to see. He must not thinkof this, or look within it, or try to learn the nature of its roots.

Feeling quiet and empty, he told himself that he would be all righttomorrow. He would forgive himself the weakness of this night, it was likethe tears one is permitted at a funeral, and then one learns how to live withan open wound or with a crippled factory.

He got up and walked to the window. The mills seemed deserted and still;he saw feeble snatches of red above black funnels, long coils of steam, thewebbed diagonals of cranes and bridges.

He felt a desolate loneliness, of a kind he had never known before.

He thought that Gwen Ives and Mr. Ward could look to him for hope, forrelief, for renewal of courage. To whom could he look for it? He, too, neededit, for once. He wished he had a friend who could be permitted to see himsuffer, without pretense or protection, on whom he could lean for a moment,just to say, "I'm very tired," and find a moment's rest. Of all the men heknew, was there one he wished he had beside him now? He heard the answer inhis mind, immediate and shocking: Francisco d'Anconia.

His chuckle of anger brought him back. The absurdity of the longing joltedhim into calm. That's what you get, he thought, when you indulge yourself inweakness.

He stood at the window, trying not to think. But he kept hearing words inhis mind: Rearden Ore . . . Rearden Coal . . . Rearden Steel . . . ReardenMetal . . . What was the use? Why had he done it? Why should he ever want todo anything again? . . .

His first day on the ledges of the ore mines . . . The day when he stoodin the wind, looking down at the ruins of a steel plant . . . The day when hestood here, in this office, at this window, and thought that a bridge couldbe made to carry incredible loads on just a few bars of metal, if onecombined a truss with an arch, if one built diagonal bracing with the topmembers curved to—

He stopped and stood still. He had not thought of combining a truss withan arch, that day.

In the next moment, he was at his desk, bending over it, with one knee onthe seat of the chair, with no time to think of sitting down, he was drawinglines, curves, triangles, columns of calculations, indiscriminately on theblueprints, on the desk blotter, on somebody's letters.

And an hour later, he was calling for a long-distance line, he was waitingfor a phone to ring by a bed in a railway car on a siding, he was saying,"Dagny! That bridge of ours—throw in the ash can all the drawings I sent you,because . . . What? . . . Oh, that? To hell with that! Never mind the lootersand their laws! Forget it! Dagny, what do we care! Listen, you know thecontraption you called the Rearden Truss, that you admired so much? It's notworth a damn. I've figured out a truss that will beat anything ever built!Your bridge will carry four trains at once, stand three hundred years andcost you less than your cheapest culvert. I'll send you the drawings in twodays, but I wanted to tell you about it right now. You see, it's a matter ofcombining a truss with an arch. If we take diagonal bracing and . . .

What? ... I can't hear you. Have you caught a cold? . . . What are youthanking me for, as yet? Wait till I explain it to you."

CHAPTER VIIITHE JOHN GALT LINE

The worker smiled, looking at Eddie Willers across the table.

"I feel like a fugitive," said Eddie Willers. 'I guess you know why Ihaven't been here for months?" He pointed at the underground cafeteria.

"I'm supposed to be a vice-president now. The Vice-President in Charge ofOperation. For God's sake, don't take it seriously. I stood it as long as Icould, and then I had to escape, if only for one evening. . . . The firsttime I came down here for dinner, after my alleged promotion, they all staredat me so much, I didn't dare come back. Well, let them stare.

You don't. I'm glad that it doesn't make any difference to you. . . .

No, I haven't seen her for two weeks. But I speak to her on the phoneevery day, sometimes twice a day. . . . Yes, I know how she feels: she lovesit. What is it we hear over the telephone—sound vibrations, isn't it? Well,her voice sounds as if it were turning into light vibrations—if you know whatI mean. She enjoys running that horrible battle single handed and winning. .. . Oh yes, she's winning! Do you know why you haven't read anything aboutthe John Gait Line in the newspapers for some time? Because it's going sowell . . . Only . . . that Rearden Metal rail will be the greatest track everbuilt, but what will be the use, if we don't have any engines powerful enoughto take advantage of it?

Look at the kind of patched coal-burners we've got left—they can barelymanage to drag themselves fast enough for old trolley-car rails. . . .

Still, there's hope. The United Locomotive Works went bankrupt. That's thebest break we've had in the last few weeks, because their plant has beenbought by Dwight Sanders. He's a brilliant young engineer who's got the onlygood aircraft plant in the country. He had to sell the aircraft plant to hisbrother, in order to take over United Locomotive.

That's on account of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. Sure, it's justa setup between them, but can you blame him? Anyway, we'll see Diesels comingout of the United Locomotive Works now. Dwight Sanders will start thingsgoing. . . . Yes, she's counting on him. Why do you ask that? . . . Yes, he'scrucially important to us right now. We've just signed a contract with him,for the first ten Diesel engines he'll build. When I phoned her that thecontract was signed, she laughed and said, "You see? Is there ever any reasonto be afraid?' . . . She said that, because she knows—I've never told her,but she knows—that I'm afraid. . . . Yes, I am. ... I don't know ... Iwouldn't be afraid if I knew of what, I could do something about it. But this. . . Tell me, don't you really despise me for being Operating Vice-President? . . .

But don't you see that it's vicious? . . . What honor? I don't know whatit is that I really am: a clown, a ghost, an understudy or just a rottenstooge. When I sit in her office, in her chair, at her desk, I feel worsethan that: I feel like a murderer. . . . Sure, I know that I'm supposed to bea stooge for her—and that would be an honor—but . . .

but I feel as if in some horrible way which I can't quite grasp, I'm astooge for Jim Taggart. Why should it be necessary for her to have a stooge?Why does she have to hide? Why did they throw her out of the building? Do youknow that she had to move out into a dinky hole in the back alley, acrossfrom our Express and Baggage Entrance? You ought to take a look at it sometime, that's the office of John Gait, Inc.

Yet everybody knows that it's she who's still running TaggartTranscontinental. Why does she have to hide the magnificent job she's doing?

Why are they giving her no credit? Why are they robbing her of herachievement—with me as the receiver of stolen goods? Why are they doing

everything in their power to make it impossible for her to succeed, whenshe's all they've got standing between them and destruction? Why are theytorturing her in return for saving their lives? . . . What's the matter withyou? Why do you look at me like that? . . . Yes, I guess you understand. . .. There's something about it all that I can't define, and it's somethingevil. That's why I'm afraid. ... I don't think one can get away with it. .. . You know, it's strange, but I think they know it, too, Jim and his crowdand all of them in the building. There's something guilty and sneaky aboutthe whole place. Guilty and sneaky and dead. Taggart Transcontinental is nowlike a man who's lost his soul . . . who's betrayed his soul. . . . No, shedoesn't care. Last time she was in New York, she came in unexpectedly—I wasin my office, in her office—and suddenly the door opened and there she was.She came in, saying, 'Mr. Willers, I'm looking for a job as a stationoperator, would you give me a chance?' I wanted to damn them all, but I hadto laugh, I was so glad to see her and she was laughing so happily. She hadcome straight from the airport—she wore slacks and a flying jacket—she lookedwonderful—she'd got windburned, it looked like a suntan, just as if she'dreturned from a vacation. She made me remain where I was, in her chair, andshe sat on the desk and talked about the new bridge of the John Gait Line. .. . No. No, I never asked her why she chose that name. ... I don't knowwhat it means to her. A sort of challenge, I guess ... I don't know to whom. . . Oh, it doesn't matter, it doesn't mean a thing, there isn't any JohnGait, but I wish she hadn't used it. I don't like it, do you? . . . You do?You don't sound very happy saying it."

The windows of the offices of the John Gait Line faced a dark alley.

Looking up from her desk, Dagny could not see the sky, only the wall of abuilding rising past her range of vision. It was the side wall of the greatskyscraper of Taggart Transcontinental.

Her new headquarters were two rooms on the ground floor of a halfcollapsed structure. The structure still stood, but its upper stories wereboarded off as unsafe for occupancy. Such tenants as it sheltered were half-bankrupt, existing, as it did, on the inertia of the momentum of the past.

She liked her new place: it saved money. The rooms contained nosuperfluous furniture or people. The furniture had come from junk shops. Thepeople were the choice best she could find. On her rare visits to New York,she had no time to notice the room where she worked; she noticed only that itserved its purpose.

She did not know what made her stop tonight and look at the thin streaksof rain on the glass of the window, at the wall of the building across thealley.

It was past midnight. Her small staff had gone. She was due at the airportat three A.M., to fly her plane back to Colorado. She had little left to do,only a few of Eddie's reports to read. With the sudden break of the tensionof hurrying, she stopped, unable to go on. The reports seemed to require aneffort beyond her power. It was too late to go home and sleep, too early togo to the airport. She thought: You're tired—and watched her own mood withsevere, contemptuous detachment, knowing that it would pass.

She had flown to New York unexpectedly, at a moment's notice, leaping tothe controls of her plane within twenty minutes after hearing a brief item ina news broadcast. The radio voice had said that Dwight Sanders had retiredfrom business, suddenly, without reason or explanation. She had hurried toNew York, hoping to find him and stop him.

But she had felt, while flying across the continent, that there would beno trace of him to find.

The spring rain hung motionless in the air beyond the window, like a thinmist. She sat, looking across at the open cavern of the Express and BaggageEntrance of the Taggart Terminal. There were naked lights inside, among the

steel girders of the ceiling, and a few piles of luggage on the worn concreteof the floor. The place looked abandoned and dead.

She glanced at a jagged crack on the wall of her office. She heard nosound. She knew she was alone in the ruins of a building. It seemed as if shewere alone in the city. She felt an emotion held back for years: a lonelinessmuch beyond this moment, beyond the silence of the room and the wet,glistening emptiness of the street; the loneliness of a gray wasteland wherenothing was worth reaching; the loneliness of her childhood.

She rose and walked to the window. By pressing her face to the pane, shecould see the whole of the Taggart Building, its lines converging abruptly toits distant pinnacle in the sky. She looked up at the dark window of the roomthat had been her office. She felt as if she were in exile, never to return,as if she were separated from the building by much more than a sheet ofglass, a curtain of rain and the span of a few months.

She stood, in a room of crumbling plaster, pressed to the windowpane,looking up at the unattainable form of everything she loved. She did not knowthe nature of her loneliness. The only words that named it were: This is notthe world I expected.

Once, when she was sixteen, looking at a long stretch of Taggart track, atthe rails that converged—like the lines of a skyscraper—to a single point inthe distance, she had told Eddie Willers that she had always felt as if therails were held in the hand of a man beyond the horizon—no, not her father orany of the men in the office—and some day she would meet him.

She shook her head and turned away from the window.

She went back to her desk. She tried to reach for the reports. Butsuddenly she was slumped across the desk, her head on her arm. Don't, shethought; but she did not move to rise, it made no difference, there was noone to see her.

This was a longing she had never permitted herself to acknowledge.

She faced it now. She thought: If emotion is one's response to the thingsthe world has to offer, if she loved the rails, the building, and more: ifshe loved her love for them—there was still one response, the greatest, thatshe had missed. She thought: To find a feeling that would hold, as their sum,as their final expression, the purpose of all the things she loved on earth .. . To find a consciousness like her own, who would be the meaning of herworld, as she would be of his . . . No, not Francisco d'Anconia, not HankRearden, not any man she had ever met or admired ... A man who existed onlyin her knowledge of her capacity for an emotion she had never felt, but wouldhave given her life to experience . . . She twisted herself in a slow, faintmovement, her breasts pressed to the desk; she felt the longing in hermuscles, in the nerves of her body.

Is that what you want? Is it as simple as that?—she thought, but knew thatit was not simple. There was some unbreakable link between her love for herwork and the desire of her body; as if one gave her the right to the other,the right and the meaning; as if one were the completion of the other—and thedesire would never be satisfied, except by a being of equal greatness.

Her face pressed to her arm, she moved her head, shaking it slowly hinegation. She would never find it. Her own thought of what life could belike, was all she would ever have of the world she had wanted. Only thethought of it—and a few rare moments, like a few lights reflected from it onher way—to know, to hold, to follow to the end . . .

She raised her head.

On the pavement of the alley, outside her window, she saw the shadow of aman who stood at the door of her office.

The door was some steps away; she could not see him, or the street lightbeyond, only his shadow on the stones of the pavement. He stood perfectlystill.

He was so close to the door, like a man about to enter, that she waited tohear him knock. Instead, she saw the shadow jerk abruptly, as if he werejolted backward, then he turned and walked away. There was only the outlineof his hat brim and shoulders left on the ground, when he stopped. The shadowlay still for a moment, wavered, and grew longer again as he came back.

She felt no fear. She sat at her desk, motionless, watching in blankwonder. He stopped at the door, then backed away from it; he stood somewherein the middle of the alley, then paced restlessly and stopped again. Hisshadow swung like an irregular pendulum across the pavement, describing thecourse of a soundless battle: it was a man fighting himself to enter thatdoor or to escape.

She looked on, with peculiar detachment. She had no power to react, onlyto observe. She wondered numbly, distantly: Who was he? Had he been watchingher from somewhere in the darkness? Had he seen her slumped across her desk,in the lighted, naked window? Had he watched her desolate loneliness as shewas now watching his? She felt nothing.

They were alone in the silence of a dead city—it seemed to her that he wasmiles away, a reflection of suffering without identity, a fellow survivorwhose problem was as distant to her as hers would be to him.

He paced, moving out of her sight, coming back again. She sat, watching—onthe glistening pavement of a dark alley—the shadow of an unknown torment.

The shadow moved away once more. She waited. It did not return.

Then she leaped to her feet. She had wanted to see the outcome of thebattle; now that he had won it—or lost—she was struck by the sudden, urgentneed to know his identity and motive. She ran through the dark anteroom, shethrew the door open and looked out.

The alley was empty. The pavement went tapering off into the distance,like a band of wet mirror under a few spaced lights. There was no one insight. She saw the dark hole of a broken window in an abandoned shop. Beyondit, there were the doors of a few rooming houses. Across the alley, streaksof rain glittered under a light that hung over the black gap of an open doorleading down to the underground tunnels of Taggart Transcontinental.

-k -k -k

Rearden signed the papers, pushed them across the desk and looked away,thinking that he would never have to think of them again, wishing he werecarried to the time when this moment would be far behind him.

Paul Larkin reached for the papers hesitantly; he looked ingratiatinglyhelpless, "It's only a legal technicality, Hank," he said. "You know thatI'll always consider these ore mines as yours."

Rearden shook his head slowly; it was just a movement of his neck muscles;his face looked immovable, as if he were speaking to a stranger.

"No!" he said. "Either I own a property or I don't."

"But . . . but you know that you can trust me. You don't have to worryabout your supply of ore. We've made an agreement. You know that you cancount on me."

"I don't know it. I hope I can."

"But I've given you my word."

"I have never been at the mercy of anyone's word before."

"Why . . . why do you say that? We're friends. I'll do anything you wish.You'll get my entire output. The mines are still yours—just as good as yours.You have nothing to fear. I'll . . . Hank, what's the matter?"

"Don't talk."

"But . . . but what's the matter?"

"I don't like assurances. I don't want any pretense about how safe I am.I'm not. We have made an agreement which I can't enforce. I want you to know

that I understand my position fully. If you intend to keep your word, don'ttalk about it, just do it."

"Why do you look at me as if it were my fault? You know how badly I feelabout it. I bought the mines only because I thought it would help you out—Imean, I thought you'd rather sell them to a friend than to some totalstranger. It's not my fault. I don't like that miserable Equalization Bill, Idon't know who's behind it, I never dreamed they'd pass it, it was such ashock to me when they—"

"Never mind."

"But I only-"

"Why do you insist on talking about it?"

"I . . ." Larkin's voice was pleading. "I gave you the best price, Hank.The law said 'reasonable compensation.' My bid was higher than anyoneelse's."

Rearden looked at the papers still lying across the desk. He thought ofthe payment these papers gave him for his ore mines. Two-thirds of the sumwas money which Larkin had obtained as a loan from the government; the newlaw made provisions for such loans "in order to give a fair opportunity tothe new owners who have never had a chance."

Two-thirds of the rest was a loan he himself had granted to Larkin, amortgage he had accepted on his own mines. . . . And the government money, hethought suddenly, the money now given to him as payment for his property,where had that come from? Whose work had provided it?

"'You don't have to worry, Hank," said Larkin, with that incomprehensible,insistent note of pleading in his voice. "It's just a paper formality."

Rearden wondered dimly what it was that Larkin wanted from him.

He felt that the man was waiting for something beyond the physical fact ofthe sale, some words which he, Rearden, was supposed to pronounce, someaction pertaining to mercy which he was expected to grant. Larkin's eyes, inthis moment of his best fortune, had the sickening look of a beggar.

"Why should you be angry, Hank? It's only a new form of legal red tape.Just a new historical condition. Nobody can help it, if it's, a historicalcondition. Nobody can be blamed for it. But there's always a way to getalong. Look at all the others. They don't mind. They're—"

"They're setting up stooges whom they control, to run the propertiesextorted from them. I—"

"Now why do you want to use such words?"

"I might as well tell you—and I think you know it—that I am not good atgames of that kind. I have neither the time nor the stomach to devise someform of blackmail in order to tie you up and own my mines through you.Ownership is a thing I don't share. And I don't wish to hold it by the graceof your cowardice—by means of a constant struggle to outwit you and keep somethreat over your head. I don't do business that way and I don't deal withcowards. The mines are yours. If you wish to give me first call on all theore produced, you will do so.

If you wish to double-cross me, it's in your power."

Larkin looked hurt. "That's very unfair of you," he said; there was a drylittle note of righteous reproach in his voice. "I have never given you causeto distrust me." He picked up the papers with a hasty movement.

Rearden saw the papers disappear into Larkin's inside coat pocket.

He saw the flare of the open coat, the wrinkles of a vest pulled tightover flabby bulges, and a stain of perspiration in the armpit of the shirt.

Unsummoned, the picture of a face seen twenty-seven years ago rosesuddenly in his mind. It was the face of a preacher on a street corner he hadpassed, in a town he could not remember any longer. Only the dark walls ofthe slums remained in his memory, the rain of an autumn evening, and therighteous malice of the man's mouth, a small mouth stretched to yell into the

darkness: ". . . the noblest ideal—that man live for the sake of hisbrothers, that the strong work for the weak, that he who has ability servehim who hasn't . . ."

Then he saw the boy who had been Hank Rearden at eighteen. He saw thetension of the face, the speed of the walk, the drunken exhilaration of thebody, drunk on the energy of sleepless nights, the proud lift of the head,the clear, steady, ruthless eyes, the eyes of a man who drove himself withoutpity toward that which he wanted. And he saw what Paul Larkin must have beenat that time—a youth with an aged baby's face, smiling ingratiatingly,joylessly, begging to be spared, pleading with the universe to give him achance. If someone had shown that youth to the Hank Rearden of that time andtold him that this was to be the goal of his steps, the collector of theenergy of his aching tendons, what would he have-It was not a thought, it was like the punch of a fist inside his skull.Then, when he could think again, Rearden knew what the boy he had beenwould have felt: a desire to step on the obscene thing which was Larkin andgrind every wet bit of it out of existence.

He had never experienced an emotion o[ this kind. It took him a fewmoments to realize that this was what men called hatred.

He noticed that rising to leave and muttering some sort of good-byes,Larkin had a wounded, reproachful, mouth-pinched look, as if he, Larkin, werethe injured party.

When he sold his coal mines to Ken Danagger, who owned the largest coalcompany in Pennsylvania, Rearden wondered why he felt as if it were almostpainless. He felt no hatred. Ken Danagger was a man in his fifties, with ahard, closed face; he had started in life as a miner.

When Rearden handed to him the deed to his new property, Danagger saidimpassively, "I don't believe I've mentioned that any coal you buy from me,you'll get it at cost."

Rearden glanced at him, astonished. "It's against the law," he said.

"Who's going to find out what sort of cash I band to you in your ownliving room?"

"You're talking about a rebate."

"I am."

"That's against two dozen laws. They'll sock you worse than me, if theycatch you at it."

"Sure. That's your protection—so you won't be left at the mercy of my goodwill."

Rearden smiled; it was a happy smile, but he closed his eyes as under ablow. Then he shook his head. "Thanks," he said. "But I'm not one of them. Idon't expect anybody to work for me at cost."

"I'm not one of them, either," said Danagger angrily. "Look here, Rearden,don't you suppose I know what I'm getting, unearned? The money doesn't payyou for it. Not nowadays."

"You didn't volunteer to bid to buy my property. I asked you to buy it. Iwish there had been somebody like you in the ore business, to take over mymines. There wasn't. If you want to do me a favor, don't offer me rebates.Give me a chance to pay you higher prices, higher than anyone else willoffer, sock me anything you wish, just so I'll be first to get the coal. I'llmanage my end of it. Only let me have the coal."

"You'll have it."

Rearden wondered, for a while, why he heard no word from Wesley Mouch. Hiscalls to Washington remained unanswered. Then he received a letter consistingof a single sentence which informed him that Mr. Mouch was resigning from hisemploy. Two weeks later, he read in the newspapers that Wesley Mouch had beenappointed Assistant Coordinator of the Bureau of Economic Planning andNational Resources.

Don't dwell on any of it—thought Rearden, through the silence of manyevenings, fighting the sudden access of that new emotion which he did notwant to feel—there is an unspeakable evil in the world, you know it, and it'sno use dwelling on the details of it. You must work a little harder. Just alittle harder. Don't let it win.

The beams and girders of the Rearden Metal bridge were coming daily out ofthe rolling mills, and were being shipped to the site of the John Gait Line,where the first shapes of green-blue metal, swung into space to span thecanyon, glittered in the first rays of the spring sun.

He had no time for pain, no energy for anger. Within a few weeks, it wasover; the blinding stabs of hatred ceased and did not return.

He was back in confident self-control on the evening when he telephonedEddie Willers, "Eddie, I'm in New York, at the Wayne-Falkland. Come to havebreakfast with me tomorrow morning. There's something I'd like to discusswith you."

Eddie Willers went to the appointment with a heavy feeling of guilt.

He had not recovered from the shock of the Equalization of OpportunityBill; it had left a dull ache within him, like the black-and-blue mark of ablow. He disliked the sight of the city: it now looked as if it hid thethreat of some malicious unknown. He dreaded facing one of the Bill'svictims: he felt almost as if he, Eddie Willers, shared the responsibilityfor it in some terrible way which he could not define.

When he saw Rearden, the feeling vanished. There was no hint suggesting avictim, in Rearden's bearing. Beyond the windows of the hotel room, thespring sunlight of early morning sparkled on the windows of the city, the skywas a very pale blue that seemed young, the offices were still closed, andthe city did not look as if it held malice, but as if it were joyously,hopefully ready to swing into action—in the same manner as Rearden. He lookedrefreshed by an untroubled sleep, he wore a dressing gown, he seemedimpatient of the necessity to dress, unwilling to delay the exciting game ofhis business duties.

"Good morning, Eddie. Sorry if I got you out so early. It's the only timeI had. Have to go back to Philadelphia right after breakfast. We can talkwhile we're eating."

The dressing gown he wore was of dark blue flannel, with the whiteinitials "H R" on the breast pocket. He looked young, relaxed, at home inthis room and in the world.

Eddie watched a waiter wheel the breakfast table into the room with aswift efficiency that made him feel braced. He found himself enjoying thestiff freshness of the white tablecloth and the sunlight sparkling on thesilver, on the two bowls of crushed ice holding glasses of orange juice; hehad not known that such things could give him an invigorating pleasure.

"I didn't want to phone Dagny long distance about this particular matter,"said Rearden. "She has enough to do. We can settle it in a few minutes, youand I."

"If I have the authority to do it,"

Rearden smiled. "You have." He leaned forward across the table."Eddie, what's the financial state of Taggart Transcontinental at themoment? Desperate?"

"Worse than that, Mr. Rearden.""Are you able to meet pay rolls?"

"Not quite. We've kept it out of the newspapers, but I think everybodyknows it. We're in arrears all over the system and Jim is running out ofexcuses."

"Do you know that your first payment for the Rearden Metal rail is duenext week?"

"Yes, I know it."

"Well, let's agree on a moratorium. I'm going to give you an extension—youwon't have to pay me anything until six months after the opening of the JohnGait Line."

Eddie Willers put down his cup of coffee with a sharp thud. He could notsay a word.

Rearden chuckled. "What's the matter? You do have the authority to accept,don't you?"

"Mr. Rearden ... I don't know . . . what to say to you."

"Why, just 'okay' is all that's necessary,"

"Okay, Mr. Rearden." Eddie's voice was barely audible.

"I'll draw up the papers and send them to you. You can tell Jim about itand have him sign them.""Yes, Mr. Rearden."

"I don't like to deal with Jim. He'd waste two hours trying to makehimself believe that he's made me believe that he's doing me a favor byaccepting."

Eddie sat without moving, looking down at his plate."What's the matter?"

"Mr. Rearden, I'd like ... to say thank you . . . but there isn't anyform of it big enough to—"

"Look, Eddie. You've got the makings of a good businessman, so you'dbetter get a few things straight. There aren't any thank-you's in situationsof this kind. I'm not doing it for Taggart Transcontinental.

It's a simple, practical, selfish matter on my part. Why should I collectmy money from you now, when it might prove to be the death blow to yourcompany? If your company were no good, I'd collect, and fast. I don't engagein charity and I don't gamble on incompetents. But you're still the bestrailroad in the country. When the John Gait Line is completed, you'll be thesoundest one financially. So I have good reason to wait. Besides, you're introuble on account of my rail. I intend to see you win,"

"I still owe you thanks, Mr. Rearden . . . for something much greater thancharity. "

"No. Don't you see? I have just received a great deal of money . . .which I didn't want. I can't invest it. It's of no use to me whatever. . .

So, in a way, it pleases me that I can turn that money against the samepeople in the same battle. They made it possible for me to give you anextension to help you fight them."

He saw Eddie wincing, as if he had hit a wound. "That's what's horribleabout it!"

"What?"

"What they've done to you—and what you're doing in return. I mean—" Hestopped. "Forgive me, Mr. Rearden. I know this is no way to talk business."

Rearden smiled. "Thanks, Eddie. I know what you mean. But forget it. Tohell with them."

"Yes. Only . . .Mr. Rearden, may I say something to you? I know it'scompletely improper and I'm not speaking as a vice-president.""Go ahead."

"I don't have to tell you what your offer means to Dagny, to me, to everydecent person on Taggart Transcontinental. You know it. And you know you cancount on us. But . . . but I think it's horrible that Jim Taggart shouldbenefit, too—that you should be the one to save him and people like him,after they—"

Rearden laughed. "Eddie, what do we care about people like him?

We're driving an express, and they're riding on the roof, making a lot ofnoise about being leaders. Why should we care? We have enough power to carrythem along—haven't we?"

"It won't stand."

The summer sun made blotches of fire on the windows of the city, andglittering sparks in the dust of the streets. Columns of heat shimmeredthrough the air, rising from the roofs to the white page of the calendar. Thecalendar's motor ran on, marking off the last days of June.

"It won't stand," people said. "When they run the first train on the JohnGait Line, the rail will split. They'll never get to the bridge. If they do,the bridge will collapse under the engine."

From the slopes of Colorado, freight trains rolled down the track of thePhoenix-Durango, north to Wyoming and the main line of TaggartTranscontinental, south to New Mexico and the main line of the AtlanticSouthern. Strings of tank cars went radiating in all directions from theWyatt oil fields to industries in distant states. No one spoke about them. Tothe knowledge of the public, the tank trains moved as silently as rays and,as rays, they were noticed only when they became the light of electric lamps,the heat of furnaces, the movement of motors; but as such, they were notnoticed, they were taken for granted.

The Phoenix-Durango Railroad was to end operations on July 25.

"Hank Rearden is a greedy monster," people said. "Look at the fortune he'smade. Has he ever given anything in return? Has he ever shown any sign ofsocial conscience? Money, that's all he's after. He'll do anything for money.What does he care if people lose their lives when his bridge collapses?"

"The Taggarts have been a band of vultures for generations," people said."It's in their blood. Just remember that the founder of that family was NatTaggart, the most notoriously anti-social scoundrel that ever lived, who bledthe country white to squeeze a fortune for himself. You can be sure that aTaggart won't hesitate to risk people's lives in order to make a profit. Theybought inferior rail, because it's cheaper than steel—what do they care aboutcatastrophes and mangled human bodies, after they've collected the fares?"

People said it because other people said it. They did not know why it wasbeing said and heard everywhere. They did not give or ask for reasons."Reason," Dr. Pritchett had told them, "is the most naive of allsuperstitions."

"The source of public opinion?" said Claude Slagenhop in a radio speech.'There is no source of public opinion. It is spontaneously general. It is areflex of the collective instinct of the collective mind."

Orren Boyle gave an interview to Globe, the news magazine with the largestcirculation. The interview was devoted to the subject of the grave socialresponsibility of metallurgists, stressing the fact that metal performed somany crucial tasks where human lives depended on its quality. "One shouldnot, it seems to me, use human beings as guinea pigs in the launching of anew product," he said. He mentioned no names.

"Why, no, I don't say that that bridge will collapse," said the chiefmetallurgist of Associated Steel, on a television program. "I don't say it atall. I just say that if I had any children, I wouldn't let them ride on thefirst train that's going to cross that bridge. But it's only a personalpreference, nothing more, just because I'm overly fond of children."

"I don't claim that the Rearden-Taggart contraption will collapse,"

wrote Bertram Scudder in The Future. "Maybe it will and maybe it won't.That's not the important issue. The important issue is: what protection doessociety have against the arrogance, selfishness and greed of two unbridledindividualists, whose records are conspicuously devoid of any public-spiritedactions? These two, apparently, are willing to stake the lives of theirfellow men on their own conceited notions about their powers of judgment,against the overwhelming majority opinion of recognized experts. Shouldsociety permit it? If that thing does collapse, won't it be too late to takeprecautionary measures? Won't it be like locking the barn after the horse has

escaped? It has always been the belief of this column that certain kinds ofhorses should be kept bridled and locked, on general social principles."

A group that called itself "Committee of Disinterested Citizens" collectedsignatures on a petition demanding a year's study of the John Gait Line bygovernment experts before the first train were allowed to run. The petitionstated that its signers had no motive other than "a sense of civic duty." Thefirst signatures were those of Balph Eubank and Mort Liddy. The petition wasgiven a great deal of space and comment in all the newspapers. Theconsideration it received was respectful, because it came from people whowere disinterested.

No space was given by the newspapers to the progress of the constructionof the John Gait Line. No reporter was sent to look at the scene. The generalpolicy of the press had been stated by a famous editor five years ago. "Thereare no objective facts," he had said. "Every report on facts is onlysomebody's opinion. It is, therefore, useless to write about facts."

A few businessmen thought that one should think about the possibility thatthere might be commercial value in Rearden Metal. They undertook a survey ofthe question. They did not hire metallurgists to examine samples, norengineers to visit the site of construction. They took a public poll. Tenthousand people, guaranteed to represent every existing kin !

of brain, were asked the question: "Would you ride on the John Gait Line?"The answer, overwhelmingly., was: "No, sir-reel"

No voices were heard in public in defense of Rearden Metal. And nobodyattached significance to the fact that the stock of Taggart Transcontinentalwas rising on the market, very slowly, almost furtively.

There were men who watched and played safe. Mr. Mowen bought Taggart stockin the name of his sister. Ben Nealy bought it in the name of a cousin. PaulLarkin bought it under an alias. "I don't believe in raising controversialissues," said one of these men.

"Oh yes, of course, the construction is moving on schedule," said JamesTaggart, shrugging, to his Board of Directors. "Oh yes, you may feel fullconfidence. My dear sister does not happen to be a human being, but just aninternal combustion engine, so one must not wonder at her success."

When James Taggart heard a rumor that some bridge girders had split andcrashed, killing three workmen, he leaped to his feet and ran to hissecretary's office, ordering him to call Colorado. He waited, pressed againstthe secretary's desk, as if seeking protection; his eyes had the unfocusedlook of panic. Yet his mouth moved suddenly into almost a smile and he said,"I'd give anything to see Henry Rearden's face right now." When he heard thatthe rumor was false, he said, "Thank God!"

But his voice had a note of disappointment.

"Oh well!" said Philip Rearden to his friends, hearing the same rumor."Maybe he can fail, too, once in a while. Maybe my great brother isn't asgreat as he thinks."

"Darling," said Lillian Rearden to her husband, "I fought for youyesterday, at a tea where the women were saying that Dagny Taggart is yourmistress. . . . Oh, for heaven's sake, don't look at me like that!

I know it's preposterous and I gave them hell for it. It's just that thosesilly bitches can't imagine any other reason why a woman would take such astand against everybody for the sake of your Metal. Of course, I know betterthan that. I know that the Taggart woman is perfectly sexless and doesn'tgive a damn about you—and, darling, I know that if you ever had the couragefor anything of the sort, which you haven't, you wouldn't go for an addingmachine in tailored suits, you'd go for some blond, feminine chorus girl who—oh, but Henry, I'm only joking!

—don't look at me like that!"

"Dagny, " James Taggart said miserably, "what's going to happen to us?Taggart Transcontinental has become so unpopular!"

Dagny laughed, in enjoyment of the moment, any moment, as if theundercurrent of enjoyment was constant within her and little was needed totap it. She laughed easily, her mouth relaxed and open. Her teeth were verywhite against her sun-scorched face. Her eyes had the look, acquired in opencountry, of being set for great distances. On her last few visits to NewYork, he had noticed that she looked at him as if she did not see him.

"What are we going to do? The public is so overwhelmingly against us!"

"Jim, do you remember the story they tell about Nat Taggart? He said thathe envied only one of his competitors, the one who said The public bedamned!' He wished he had said it."

In the summer days and in the heavy stillness of the evenings of the city,there were moments when a lonely man or woman—on a park bench, on a streetcorner, at an open window—would see in a newspaper a brief mention of theprogress of the John Gait Line, and would look at the city with a sudden stabof hope. They were the very young, who felt that it was the kind of eventthey longed to see happening in the world—or the very old, who had seen aworld in which such events did happen. They did not care about railroads,they knew nothing about business, they knew only that someone was fightingagainst great odds and winning. They did not admire the fighters' purpose,they believed the voices of public opinion—and yet, when they read that theLine was growing, they felt a moment's sparkle and wondered why it made theirown problems seem easier.

Silently, unknown to everyone except to the freight yard of TaggartTranscontinental in Cheyenne and the office of the John Gait Line in the darkalley, freight was rolling in and orders for cars were piling up—

for the first train to run on the John Gait Line. Dagny Taggart hadannounced that the first train would be, not a passenger express loaded withcelebrities and politicians, as was the custom, but a freight special.

The freight came from farms, from lumber yards, from mines all over thecountry, from distant places whose last means of survival were the newfactories of Colorado. No one wrote about these shippers, because they weremen who were not disinterested.

The Phoenix-Durango Railroad was to close on July 25. The first train ofthe John Gait Line was to run on July 22.

"Well, it's like this, Miss Taggart," said the delegate of the Union ofLocomotive Engineers. "I don't think we're going to allow you to run thattrain. "

Dagny sat at her battered desk, against the blotched wall of her office.She said, without moving, "Get out of here."

It was a sentence the man had never heard in the polished offices ofrailroad executives. He looked bewildered. "I came to tell you—""If you have anything to say to me, start over again.""What?"

"Don't tell me what you're going to allow me to do."

"Well, I meant we're not going to allow our men to run your train."

"That's different."

"Well, that's what we've decided."

"Who's decided it?"

"The committee. What you're doing is a violation of human rights.

You can't force men to go out to get killed—when that bridge collapses —just to make money for you."

She reached for a sheet of blank paper and handed it to him. "Put it downin writing," she said, "and we'll sign a contract to that effect."

"What contract?"

"That no member of your union will ever be employed to run an engine onthe John Gait Line."

"Why . . . wait a minute ... I haven't said—""You don't want to sign such a contract?"-No, I-"

"Why not, since you know that the bridge is going to collapse?""I only want—"

"I know what you want. You want a stranglehold on your men by means of thejobs which I give them—and on me, by means of your men. You want me toprovide the jobs, and you want to make it impossible for me to have any jobsto provide. Now I'll give you a choice.

That train is going to be run. You have no choice about that. But you canchoose whether it's going to be run by one of your men or not. If you choosenot to let them, the train will still run, if I have to drive the enginemyself. Then, if the bridge collapses, there won't be any railroad left inexistence, anyway. But if it doesn't collapse, no member of your union willever get a job on the John Gait Line. If you think that I need your men morethan they need me, choose accordingly. If you know that I can run an engine,but they can't build a railroad, choose according to that. Now are you goingto forbid your men to run that train?"

"I didn't say we'd forbid it. I haven't said anything about forbidding.

But . . . but you can't force men to risk their lives on somethingnobody's ever tried before."

"I'm not going to force anyone to take that run."

"What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to ask for a volunteer."

"And if none of them volunteers?"

"Then it will be my problem, not yours."

"Well, let me tell you that I'm going to advise them to refuse."

"Go ahead. Advise them anything you wish. Tell them whatever, you like.But leave the choice to them. Don't try to forbid it."

The notice that appeared in every roundhouse of the Taggart system wassigned "Edwin Willers, Vice-President in Charge of Operation." It askedengineers, who were willing to drive the first train on the John Gait Line,so to inform the office of Mr. Willers., not later than eleven A.M. of July15.

It was a quarter of eleven, on the morning of the fifteenth, when thetelephone rang in her office. It was Eddie, calling from high up in theTaggart Building outside her window. "Dagny, I think you'd better come over."His voice sounded queer.

She hurried across the street, then down the marble-floored halls, to thedoor that still carried the name "Dagny Taggart" on its glass panel.

She pulled the door open.

The anteroom of the office was full. Men stood jammed among the desks,against the walls. As she entered, they took their hats off in suddensilence. She saw the graying heads, the muscular shoulders, she saw thesmiling faces of her staff at their desks and the face of Eddie Willers atthe end of the room. Everybody knew that nothing had to be said.

Eddie stood by the open door of her office. The crowd parted to let herapproach him. He moved his hand, pointing at the room, then at a pile ofletters and telegrams.

"Dagny, every one of them," he said. "Every engineer on TaggartTranscontinental. Those who could, came here, some from as far as the ChicagoDivision." He pointed at the mail. "There's the rest of them.

To be exact, there's only three I haven't heard from: one's on a vacationin the north woods, one's in a hospital, and one's in jail for recklessdriving—of his automobile."

She looked at the men. She saw the suppressed grins on the solemn faces.She inclined her head, in acknowledgment. She stood for a moment, head bowed,as if she were accepting a verdict, knowing that the verdict applied to her,to every man in the room and to the world beyond the walls of the building.

"Thank you," she said.

Most of the men had seen her many times. Looking at her, as she raised herhead, many of them thought—in astonishment and for the first time—that theface of their Operating Vice-President was the face of a woman and that itwas beautiful.

Someone in the back of the crowd cried suddenly, cheerfully, 'To hell withJim Taggart!"

An explosion answered him. The men laughed, they cheered, they broke intoapplause. The response was out of all proportion to the sentence. But thesentence had given them the excuse they needed. They seemed to be applaudingthe speaker, in insolent defiance of authority.

But everyone in the room knew who it was that they were cheering.

She raised her hand. "We're too early," she said, laughing. "Wait till aweek from today. That's when we ought to celebrate. And believe me, we will!"

They drew lots for the run. She picked a folded slip of paper from among apile containing all their names. The winner was not in the room, but he wasone of the best men on the system, Pat Logan, engineer of the Taggart Cometon the Nebraska Division.

"Wire Pat and tell him he's been demoted to a freight," she said to Eddie.She added casually, as if it were a last-moment decision, but it fooled noone, "Oh yes, tell him that I'm going to ride with him in the cab of theengine on that run."

An old engineer beside her grinned and said, "I thought you would, MissTaggart."

Rearden was in New York on the day when Dagny telephoned him from heroffice. "Hank, I'm going to have a press conference tomorrow."He laughed aloud. "No!"

"Yes." Her voice sounded earnest, but, dangerously, a bit too earnest."The newspapers have suddenly discovered me and are asking questions.I'm going to answer them.""Have a good time."

"I will. Are you going to be in town tomorrow? I'd like to have you in onit. "

"Okay. I wouldn't want to miss it."

The reporters who came to the press conference in the office of the JohnGait Line were young men who had been trained to think that their jobconsisted of concealing from the world the nature of its events. It was theirdaily duty to serve as audience for some public- figure who made utterancesabout the public good, in phrases carefully chosen to convey no meaning. Itwas their daily job to sling words together in any combination they pleased,so long as the words did not fall into a sequence saying something specific.They could not understand the interview now being given to them.

Dagny Taggart sat behind her desk in an office that looked like a slumbasement. She wore a dark blue suit with a white blouse, beautifullytailored, suggesting an air of formal, almost military elegance. She satstraight, and her manner was severely dignified, just a shade too dignified.

Rearden sat in a corner of the room, sprawled across a broken armchair,his long legs thrown over one of its arms, his body leaning against theother. His manner was pleasantly informal, just a bit too informal.

In the clear, monotonous voice of a military report, consulting no papers,looking straight at the men, Dagny recited the technological facts about theJohn Gait Line, giving exact figures on the nature of the rail, the capacityof the bridge, the method of construction, the costs. Then, in the dry tone

of a banker, she explained the financial prospects of the Line and named thelarge profits she expected to make. 'That is all,"she said.

"All?" said one of the reporters. "Aren't you going to give us a messagefor the public?"

"That was my message."

"But hell—I mean, aren't you going to defend yourself?""Against what?"

"Don't you want to tell us something to justify your Line?""I have."

A man with a mouth shaped as a permanent sneer asked, "Well, what I wantto know, as Bertram Scudder stated, is what protection do we have againstyour Line being no good?"

"Don't ride on it."

Another asked, "Aren't you going to tell us your motive for building thatLine?"

"I have told you: the profit which I expect to make."

"Oh, Miss Taggart, don't say that!" cried a young boy. He was new, he wasstill honest about his job, and he felt that he liked Dagny Taggart, withoutknowing why. "That's the wrong thing to say. That's what they're all sayingabout you."

"Are they?"

"I'm sure you didn't mean it the way it sounds and . . . and I'm sureyou'll want to clarify it."

"Why, yes, if you wish me to. The average profit of railroads has been twoper cent of the capital invested. An industry that does so much and keeps solittle, should consider itself immoral. As I have explained, the cost of theJohn Gait Line in relation to the traffic which it will carry makes me expecta profit of not less than fifteen per cent on our investment. Of course, anyindustrial profit above four per cent is considered usury nowadays. I shall,nevertheless, do my best to make the John Gait Line earn a profit of twentyper cent for me, if possible. That was my motive for building the Line. HaveI made myself clear now?"

The boy was looking at her helplessly. "You don't mean, to earn a profitfor you, Miss Taggart? You mean, for the small stockholders, of course?" heprompted hopefully.

"Why, no. I happen to be one of the largest stockholders of TaggartTranscontinental, so my share of the profits will be one of the largest, Now,Mr. Rearden is in a much more fortunate position, because he has nostockholders to share with—or would you rather make your own statement, Mr.Rearden?"

"Yes, gladly," said Rearden. "Inasmuch as the formula of Rearden Metal ismy own personal secret, and in view of the fact that the Metal costs muchless to produce than you boys can imagine, I expect to skin the public to thetune of a profit of twenty-five per cent in the next few years."

"What do you mean, skin the public, Mr. Rearden?" asked the boy.

"If it's true, as I've read in your ads, that your Metal will last threetimes longer than any other and at half the price, wouldn't the public begetting a bargain?"

"Oh, have you noticed that?" said Rearden.

"Do the two of you realize you're talking for publication?" asked the manwith the sneer.

"But, Mr. Hopkins," said Dagny, in polite astonishment, "is there anyreason why we would talk to you, if it weren't for publication?""Do you want us to quote all the things you said?"

"I hope I may trust you to be sure and quote them. Would you oblige me bytaking this down verbatim?" She paused to see their pencils ready, then

dictated: "Miss Taggart says—quote—I expect to make a pile of money on theJohn Gait Line. I will have earned it. Close quote. Thank you so much."

"Any questions, gentlemen?" asked Rearden.

There were no questions.

"Now I must tell you about the opening of the John Gait Line," said Dagny."The first train will depart from the station of Taggart Transcontinental inCheyenne, Wyoming, at four P.M. on July twenty-second.

It will be a freight special, consisting of eighty cars. It will be drivenby an eight-thousand-horsepower, four-unit Diesel locomotive—which I'mleasing from Taggart Transcontinental for the occasion. It will run non-stopto Wyatt Junction, Colorado, traveling at an average speed of one hundredmiles per hour. I beg your pardon?" she asked, hearing the long, low sound ofa whistle.

"What did you say, Miss Taggart?"

"I said, one hundred miles per hour—grades, curves and all."

"But shouldn't you cut the speed below normal rather than . . . MissTaggart, don't you have any consideration whatever for public opinion?"

"But I do. If it weren't for public opinion, an average speed of sixty-five miles per hour would have been quite sufficient."

"Who's going to run that train?"

"I had quite a bit of trouble about that. All the Taggart engineersvolunteered to do it. So did the firemen, the brakemen and the conductors. Wehad to draw lots for every job on the train's crew. The engineer will be PatLogan, of the Taggart Comet, the fireman—Ray McKim.

I shall ride in the cab of the engine with them."

"Not really!"

"Please do attend the opening. It's on July twenty-second. The press ismost eagerly invited. Contrary to my usual policy, I have become a publicityhound. Really. I should like to have spotlights, radio microphones andtelevision cameras. I suggest that you plant a few cameras around the bridge.The collapse of the bridge would give you some interesting shots."

"Miss Taggart," asked Rearden, "why didn't you mention that I'm going toride in that engine, too?"

She looked at him across the room, and for a moment they were alone,holding each other's glance.

"Yes, of course, Mr. Rearden," she answered.

She did not see him again until they looked at each other across theplatform of the Taggart station in Cheyenne, on July 22.

She did not look for anyone when she stepped out on the platform: she feltas if her senses had merged, so that she could not distinguish the sky, thesun or the sounds of an enormous crowd, but perceived only a sensation ofshock and light.

Yet he was the first person she saw, and she could not tell for how long atime he was also the only one. He stood by the engine of the John Gait train,talking to somebody outside the field of her consciousness.

He was dressed in gray slacks and shirt, he looked like an expertmechanic, but he was stared at by the faces around him, because he was HankRearden of Rearden Steel. High above him, she saw the letters TT on thesilver front of the engine. The lines of the engine slanted back, aimed atspace.

There was distance and a crowd between them, but his eyes moved to her themoment she came out. They looked at each other and she knew that he felt asshe did. This was not to be a solemn venture upon which their futuredepended, but simply their day of enjoyment. Their work was done. For themoment, there was no future. They had earned the present.

Only if one feels immensely important, she had told him, can one feeltruly light. Whatever the train's run would mean to others, for the two of

them their own persons were this day's sole meaning. Whatever it was thatothers sought in life, their right to what they now felt was all the two ofthem wished to find. It was as if, across the platform, they said it to eachother.

Then she turned away from him.

She noticed that she, too, was being stared at, that there were peoplearound her, that she was laughing and answering questions.

She had not expected such a large crowd. They filled the platform, thetracks, the square beyond the station; they were on the roofs of the boxcarson the sidings, at the windows of every house in sight. Something had drawnthem here, something in the air which, at the last moment, had made JamesTaggart want to attend the opening of the John Gait Line. She had forbiddenit. "If you come, Jim," she had said, "I'll have you thrown out of your ownTaggart station. This is one event you're not going to see." Then she hadchosen Eddie Willers to represent Taggart Transcontinental at the opening.

She looked at the crowd and she felt, simultaneously, astonishment thatthey should stare at her, when this event was so personally her own that nocommunication about it was possible, and a sense of fitness that they shouldbe here, that they should want to see it, because the sight of an achievementwas the greatest gift a human being could offer to others.

She felt no anger toward anyone on earth. The things she had endured hadnow receded into some outer fog, like pain that still exists, but has nopower to hurt. Those things could not stand in the face of this moment'sreality, the meaning of this day was as brilliantly, violently clear as thesplashes of sun on the silver of the engine, all men had to perceive it now,no one could doubt it and she had no one to hate.

Eddie Willers was watching her. He stood on the platform, surrounded byTaggart executives, division heads, civic leaders, and the various localofficials who had been out argued, bribed or threatened, to obtain permits torun a train through town zones at a hundred miles an hour. For once, for thisday and event, his title of Vice-president was real to him and he carried itwell. But while he spoke to those around him, his eyes kept following Dagnythrough the crowd. She was dressed in blue slacks and shirt, she wasunconscious of official duties, she had left them to him, the train was nowher sole concern, as if she were only a member of its crew.

She saw him, she approached, and she shook his hand; her smile was like asummation of all the things they did not have to say. "Well, Eddie, you'reTaggart Transcontinental now."

"Yes," he said solemnly, his voice low.

There were reporters asking questions, and they dragged her away from him.They were asking him questions, too. "Mr. Willers, what is the policy ofTaggart Transcontinental in regard to this line?" "So TaggartTranscontinental is just a disinterested observer, is it, Mr. Willers?"

He answered as best he could. He was looking at the sun on a Dieselengine. But what he was seeing was the sun in a clearing of the woods and atwelve-year-old girl telling him that he would help her run the railroad someday.

He watched from a distance while the train's crew was lined up in front ofthe engine, to face a firing squad of cameras. Dagny and Rearden weresmiling, as if posing for snapshots of a summer vacation. Pat Logan, theengineer, a short, sinewy man with graying hair and a contemptuouslyinscrutable face, posed in a manner of amused indifference.

Ray McKim, the fireman, a husky young giant, grinned with an air ofembarrassment and superiority together. The rest of the crew looked as ifthey were about to wink at the cameras. A photographer said, laughing, "Can'tyou people look doomed, please? I know that's what the editor wants."

Dagny and Rearden were answering questions for the press. There was nomockery in their answers now, no bitterness. They were enjoying it. Theyspoke as if the questions were asked in good faith. Irresistibly, at somepoint which no one noticed, this became true, "What do you expect to happenon this run?" a reporter asked one of the brakemen. "Do you think you'll getthere?"

"I think we'll get there," said the brakeman, "and so do you, brother."

"Mr. Logan, do you have any children? Did you take out any extrainsurance? I'm just thinking of the bridge, you know."

"Don't cross that bridge till I come to it," Pat Logan answeredcontemptuously.

"Mr. Rearden, how do you know that your rail will hold?"

'The man who taught people to make a printing press," said Rearden, "howdid he know it?"

"Tell me, Miss Taggart, what's going to support a seven-thousand-ton trainon a three-thousand-ton bridge?""My judgment," she answered.

The men of the press, who despised their own profession, did not know whythey were enjoying it today. One of them, a young man with years of notorioussuccess behind him and a cynical look of twice his age, said suddenly, "Iknow what I'd like to be: I wish I could be a man who covers news!"

The hands of the clock on the station building stood at 3:45. The crewstarted off toward the caboose at the distant end of the train. The movementand noise of the crowd were subsiding. Without conscious intention, peoplewere beginning to stand still.

The dispatcher had received word from every local operator along the lineof rail that wound through the mountains to the Wyatt oil fields threehundred miles away. He came out of the station building and, looking atDagny, gave the signal for clear track ahead. Standing by the engine, Dagnyraised her hand, repeating his gesture in sign of an order received andunderstood.

The long line of boxcars stretched off into the distance, in spaced,rectangular links, like a spinal cord. When the conductor's arm swept throughthe air, far at the end, she moved her arm in answering signal.

Rearden, Logan and McKim stood silently, as if at attention, letting herbe first to get aboard. As she started up the rungs on the side of theengine, a reporter thought of a question he had not asked.

"Miss Taggart," he called after her, "who is John Gait?"

She turned, hanging onto a metal bar with one hand, suspended for aninstant above the heads of the crowd.

"We are!" she answered.

Logan followed her into the cab, then McKim; Rearden went last, then thedoor of the engine was shut, with the tight finality of sealed metal.

The lights, hanging on a signal bridge against the sky, were green.

There were green lights between the tracks, low over the ground, droppingoff into the distance where the rails turned and a green light stood at thecurve, against leaves of a summer green that looked as if they, too, werelights.

Two men held a white silk ribbon stretched across the track in front ofthe engine. They were the superintendent of the Colorado Division and Nealy'schief engineer, who had remained on the job. Eddie Willers was to cut theribbon they held and thus to open the new line.

The photographers posed him carefully, scissors in hand, his back to theengine. He would repeat the ceremony two or three times, they explained, togive them a choice of shots; they had a fresh bolt of ribbon ready. He wasabout to comply, then stopped. "No," he said suddenly.

"It's not going to be a phony."

In a voice of quiet authority, the voice of a vice-president, he ordered,pointing at the cameras, "Stand back—way back. Take one shot when I cut it,then get out of the way, fast."

They obeyed, moving hastily farther down the track. There was only oneminute left. Eddie turned his back to the cameras and stood between therails, facing the engine. He held the scissors ready over the white ribbon.He took his hat off and tossed it aside. He was looking up at the engine. Afaint wind stirred his blond hair. The engine was a great silver shieldbearing the emblem of Nat Taggart.

Eddie Willers raised his hand as the hand of the station clock reached theinstant of four.

"Open her up, Pat!" he called.

In the moment when the engine started forward, he cut the white ribbon andleaped out of the way.

From the side track, he saw the window of the cab go by and Dagny wavingto him in an answering salute. Then the engine was gone, and he stood lookingacross at the crowded platform that kept appearing and vanishing as thefreight cars clicked past him.

The green-blue rails ran to meet them, like two jets shot out of a singlepoint beyond the curve of the earth. The crossties melted, as theyapproached, into a smooth stream rolling down under the wheels. A blurredstreak clung to the side of the engine, low over the ground. Trees andtelegraph poles sprang into sight abruptly and went by as if jerked back. Thegreen plains stretched past, in a leisurely flow. At the edge of the sky, along wave of mountains reversed the movement and seemed to follow the train.

She felt no wheels under the floor. The motion was a smooth flight on asustained impulse, as if the engine hung above the rails, riding a current.She felt no speed. It seemed strange that the green lights of the signalskept coming at them and past, every few seconds. She knew that the signallights were spaced two miles apart.

The needle on the speedometer in front of Pat Logan stood at one hundred.

She sat in the fireman's chair and glanced across at Logan once in awhile. He sat slumped forward a little, relaxed, one hand resting lightly onthe throttle as if by chance; but his eyes were fixed on the track ahead. Hehad the ease of an expert, so confident that it seemed casual, but it was theease of a tremendous concentration, the concentration on one's task that hasthe ruthlessness of an absolute. Ray McKim sat on a bench behind them.Rearden stood in the middle of the cab.

He stood, hands in pockets, feet apart, braced against the motion, lookingahead. There was nothing he could now care to see by the side of the track:he was looking at the rail.

Ownership—she thought, glancing back at him—weren't there those who knewnothing of its nature and doubted its reality? No, it was not made of papers,seals, grants and permissions. There it was—in his eyes.

The sound filling the cab seemed part of the space they were crossing. Itheld the low drone of the motors—the sharper clicking of the many parts thatrang in varied cries of metal—and the high, thin chimes of trembling glasspanes.

Things streaked past—a water tank, a tree, a shanty, a grain silo.

They had a windshield-wiper motion: they were rising, describing a curveand dropping back. The telegraph wires ran a race with the train, rising andfalling from pole to pole, in an even rhythm, like the cardiograph record ofa steady heartbeat written across the sky.

She looked ahead, at the haze that melted rail and distance, a haze thatcould rip apart at any moment to some shape of disaster. She wondered why shefelt safer than she had ever felt in a car behind the engine, safer here,where it seemed as if, should an obstacle rise, her breast and the glass

shield would be first to smash against it. She smiled, grasping the answer:it was the security of being first, with full sight and full knowledge ofone's course—not the blind sense of being pulled into the unknown by someunknown power ahead. It was the greatest sensation of existence: not totrust, but to know.

The glass sheets of the cab's windows made the spread of the fields seemvaster: the earth looked as open to movement as it was to sight.

Yet nothing was distant and nothing was out of reach. She had barelygrasped the sparkle of a lake ahead—and in the next instant she was besideit, then past.

It was a strange foreshortening between sight and touch, she thought,between wish and fulfillment, between—the words clicked sharply in her mindafter a startled stop—between spirit and body. First, the vision—then thephysical shape to express it. First, the thought—then the purposeful motiondown the straight line of a single track to a chosen goal. Could one have anymeaning without the other? Wasn't it evil to wish without moving—or to movewithout aim? Whose malevolence was it that crept through the world,struggling to break the two apart and set them against each other?

She shook her head. She did not want to think or to wonder why the worldbehind her was as it was. She did not care. She was flying away from it, atthe rate of a hundred miles an hour. She leaned to the open window by herside, and felt the wind of the speed blowing her hair off her forehead. Shelay back, conscious of nothing but the pleasure it gave her.

Yet her mind kept racing. Broken bits of thought flew past her attention,like the telegraph poles by the track. Physical pleasure?—she thought. Thisis a train made of steel . . . running on rails of Rearden Metal . . . movedby the energy of burning oil and electric generators . . . it's a physicalsensation of physical movement through space . . . but is that the cause andthe meaning of what I now feel?

. . . Do they call it a low, animal joy—this feeling that I would not careif the rail did break to bits under us now—it won't—but I wouldn't care,because I have experienced this? A low, physical, material, degradingpleasure of the body?

She smiled, her eyes closed, the wind streaming through her hair.

She opened her eyes and saw that Rearden stood looking down at her. It wasthe same glance with which he had looked at the rail. She felt her power ofvolition knocked out by some single, dull blow that made her unable to move.She held his eyes, lying back in her chair, the wind pressing the thin clothof her shirt to her body.

He looked away, and she turned again to the sight of the earth tearingopen before them.

She did not want to think, but the sound of thought went on, like thedrone of the motors under the sounds of the engine. She looked at the cabaround her. The fine steel mesh of the ceiling, she thought, and the row ofrivets in the corner, holding sheets of steel sealed together—who made them?The brute force of men's muscles? Who made it possible for four dials andthree levers in front of Pat Logan to hold the incredible power of thesixteen motors behind them and deliver it to the effortless control of oneman's hand?

These things and the capacity from which they came—was this the pursuitmen regarded as evil? Was this what they called an ignoble concern with thephysical world? Was this the state of being enslaved by matter? Was this thesurrender of man's spirit to his body?

She shook her head, as if she wished she could toss the subject out of thewindow and let it get shattered somewhere along the track. She looked at thesun on the summer fields. She did not have to think, because these questionswere only details of a truth she knew and had always known. Let them go past

like the telegraph poles. The thing she knew was like the wires flying abovein an unbroken line. The words for it, and for this journey, and for herfeeling, and for the whole of man's earth, were: It's so simple and so right!

She looked out at the country. She had been aware for some time of thehuman figures that flashed with an odd regularity at the side of the track.But they went by so fast that she could not grasp their meaning until, likethe squares of a movie film, brief flashes blended into a whole and sheunderstood it. She had had the track guarded since its completion, but shehad not hired the human chain she saw strung out along the right-of-way. Asolitary figure stood at every mile post. Some were young schoolboys, otherswere so old that the silhouettes of their bodies looked bent against the sky.All of them were armed, with anything they had found, from costly rifles toancient muskets. All of them wore railroad caps. They were the sons ofTaggart employees, and old railroad men who had retired after a full lifetimeof Taggart service. They had come, unsummoned, to guard this train. As theengine went past him, every man in his turn stood erect, at attention, andraised his gun in a military salute.

When she grasped it, she burst out laughing, suddenly, with the abruptnessof a cry. She laughed, shaking, like a child; it sounded like sobs ofdeliverance. Pat Logan nodded to her with a faint smile; he had noted theguard of honor long ago. She leaned to the open window, and her arm swept inwide curves of triumph, waving to the men by the track.

On the crest of a distant hill, she saw a crowd of people, their armsswinging against the sky. The gray houses of a village were scattered througha valley below, as if dropped there once and forgotten; the roof linesslanted, sagging, and the years had washed away the color of the walls.Perhaps generations had lived there, with nothing to mark the passage oftheir days but the movement of the sun from east to west.

Now, these men had climbed the hill to see a silver-headed comet cutthrough their plains like the sound of a bugle through a long weight ofsilence.

As houses began to come more frequently, closer to the track, she sawpeople at the windows, on the porches, on distant roofs. She saw crowdsblocking the roads at grade crossings. The roads went sweeping past like thespokes of a fan, and she could not distinguish human figures, only their armsgreeting the train like branches waving in the wind of its speed. They stoodunder the swinging red lights of warning signals, under the signs saying;"Stop. Look. Listen."

The station past which they flew, as they went through a town at a hundredmiles an hour, was a swaying sculpture of people from platform to roof. Shecaught the flicker of waving arms, of hats tossed in the air, of somethingflung against the side of the engine, which was a bunch of flowers.

As the miles clicked past them, the towns went by, with the stations atwhich they did not stop, with the crowds of people who had come only to see,to cheer and to hope. She saw garlands of flowers under the sooted eaves ofold station buildings, and bunting of red-white-and-blue on the time-eatenwalls. It was like the pictures she had seen—and envied—in schoolbookhistories of railroads, from the era when people gathered to greet the firstrun of a train. It was like the age when Nat Taggart moved across thecountry, and the stops along his way were marked by men eager for the sightof achievement. That age, she had thought, was gone; generations had passed,with no event to greet anywhere, with nothing to see but the crackslengthening year by year on the walls built by Nat Taggart. Yet men cameagain, as they had come in his time, drawn by the same response.

She glanced at Rearden. He stood against the wall, unaware of the crowds,indifferent to admiration. He was watching the performance of track and trainwith an expert's intensity of professional interest; his bearing suggested

that he would kick aside, as irrelevant, any thought such as 'They like it,"when the thought ringing in his mind was "It works!"

His tall figure in the single gray of slacks and shirt looked as if hisbody were stripped for action. The slacks stressed the long lines of hislegs, the light, firm posture of standing without effort or being ready toswing forward at an instant's notice; the short sleeves stressed the gauntstrength of his arms; the open shirt bared the tight skin of his chest.

She turned away, realizing suddenly that she had been glancing back at himtoo often. But this day had no ties to past or future—her thoughts were cutoff from implications—she saw no further meaning, only the immediateintensity of the feeling that she was imprisoned with him, sealed together inthe same cube of air, the closeness of his presence underscoring herawareness of this day, as his rails underscored the flight of the train.

She turned deliberately and glanced back. He was looking at her.

He did not turn away, but held her glance, coldly and with full intention.

She smiled defiantly, not letting herself know the full meaning of hersmile, knowing only that it was the sharpest blow she could strike at hisinflexible face. She felt a sudden desire to see him trembling, to tear a cryout of him. She turned her head away, slowly, feeling a reckless amusement,wondering why she found it difficult to breathe.

She sat leaning back in her chair, looking ahead, knowing that he was asaware of her as she was of him. She found pleasure in the special self-consciousness it gave her. When she crossed her legs, when she leaned on herarm against the window sill, when she brushed her hair off her forehead—everymovement of her body was underscored by a feeling the unadmitted words forwhich were: Is he seeing it?

The towns had been left behind. The track was rising through a countrygrowing more grimly reluctant to permit approach. The rails kept vanishingbehind curves, and the ridges of hills kept moving closer, as if the plainswere being folded into pleats. The flat stone shelves of Colorado wereadvancing to the edge of the track—and the distant reaches of the sky wereshrinking into waves of bluish mountains.

Far ahead, they saw a mist of smoke over factory chimneys—then the web ofa power station and the lone needle of a steel structure. They wereapproaching Denver.

She glanced at Pat Logan. He was leaning forward a little farther; she sawa slight tightening in the fingers of his hand and in his eyes. He knew, asshe did, the danger of crossing a city at the speed they were traveling.

It was a succession of minutes, but it hit them as a single whole. First,they saw the lone shapes, which were factories, rolling across theirwindowpanes—then the shapes fused into the blur of streets—then a delta ofrails spread out before them, like the mouth of a funnel sucking them intothe Taggart station, with nothing to protect them but the small green beadsof lights scattered over the ground—from the height of the cab, they sawboxcars on sidings streak past as flat ribbons of roof tops —the black holeof the train-shed flew at their faces—they hurtled through an explosion ofsound, the beating of wheels against the glass panes of a vault, and thescreams of cheering from a mass that swayed like a liquid in the darknessamong steel columns—they flew toward a glowing arch and the green lightshanging in the open sky beyond, the green lights that were like the doorknobsof space, throwing door after door open before them. Then, vanishing behindthem, went the streets clotted with traffic, the open windows bulging withhuman figures, the screaming sirens, and—from the top of a distantskyscraper—a cloud of paper snowflakes shimmering on the air, flung bysomeone who saw the passage of a silver bullet across a city stopped still towatch it.

Then they were out again, on a rocky grade—and with shocking suddenness,the mountains were before them, as if the city had flung them straight at agranite wall, and a thin ledge had caught them in time. They were clinging tothe side of a vertical cliff, with the earth rolling down, dropping away, andgiant tiers of twisted boulders streaming up and shutting out the sun,leaving them to speed through a bluish twilight, with no sight of soil orsky.

The curves of rail became coiling circles among walls that advanced togrind them off their sides. But the track cut through at times and themountains parted, flaring open like two wings at the tip of the rail—one winggreen, made of vertical needles, with whole pines serving as the pile of asolid carpet—the other reddish-brown, made of naked rock.

She looked down through the open window and saw the silver side of theengine hanging over empty space. Far below, the thin thread of a stream wentfalling from ledge to ledge, and the ferns that drooped to the water were theshimmering tops of birch trees. She saw the engine's tail of boxcars windingalong the face of a granite drop—and miles of contorted stone below, she sawthe coils of green-blue rail unwinding behind the train.

A wall of rock shot upward in their path, filling the windshield,darkening the cab, so close that it seemed as if the remnant of time couldnot let them escape it. But she heard the screech of wheels on curve, thelight came bursting back—and she saw an open stretch of rail on a narrowshelf. The shelf ended in space. The nose of the engine was aimed straight atthe sky. There was nothing to stop them but two strips of green-blue metalstrung in a curve along the shelf.

To take the pounding violence of sixteen motors, she thought, the thrustof seven thousand tons of steel and freight, to withstand it, grip it andswing it around a curve, was the impossible feat performed by two strips ofmetal no wider than her arm. What made it possible? What power had given toan unseen arrangement of molecules the power on which their lives dependedand the lives of all the men who waited for the eighty boxcars? She saw aman's face and hands in the glow of a laboratory oven, over the white liquidof a sample of metal.

She felt the sweep of an emotion which she could not contain, as ofsomething bursting upward. She turned to the door of the motor units, shethrew it open to a screaming jet of sound and escaped into the pounding ofthe engine's heart.

For a moment, it was as if she were reduced to a single sense, the senseof hearing, and what remained of her hearing was only a long, rising,falling, rising scream. She stood in a swaying, sealed chamber of metal,looking at the giant generators. She had wanted to see them, because thesense of triumph within her was bound to them, to her love for them, to thereason of the life-work she had chosen. In the abnormal clarity of a violentemotion, she felt as if she were about to grasp something she had never knownand had to know. She laughed aloud, but heard no sound of it; nothing couldbe heard through the continuous explosion. "The John Gait Line!" she shouted,for the amusement of feeling her voice swept away from her lips.

She moved slowly along the length of the motor units, down a narrowpassage between the engines and the wall. She felt the immodesty of anintruder, as if she had slipped inside a living creature, under its silverskin, and were watching its life beating in gray metal cylinders, in twistedcoils, in sealed tubes, in the convulsive whirl of blades in wire cages. Theenormous complexity of the shape above her was drained by invisible channels,and the violence raging within it was led to fragile needles on glass dials,to green and red beads winking on panels, to tall, thin cabinets stenciled"High Voltage."

Why had she always felt that joyous sense of confidence when looking atmachines?—she thought. In these giant shapes, two aspects pertaining to theinhuman were radiantly absent: the causeless and the purposeless. Every partof the motors was an embodied answer to "Why?"

and "What for?"—like the steps of a life-course chosen by the sort of mindshe worshipped. The motors were a moral code cast in steel.

They are alive, she thought, because they are the physical shape of theaction of a living power—of the mind that had been able to grasp the whole ofthis complexity, to set its purpose, to give it form. For an instant, itseemed to her that the motors were transparent and she was seeing the net oftheir nervous system. It was a net of connections, more intricate, morecrucial than all of their wires and circuits: the rational connections madeby that human mind which had fashioned any one part of them for the firsttime.

They are alive, she thought, but their soul operates them by remotecontrol. Their soul is in every man who has the capacity to equal thisachievement. Should the soul vanish from the earth, the motors would stop,because that is the power which keeps them going—not the oil under the floorunder her feet, the oil that would then become primeval ooze again—not thesteel cylinders that would become stains of rust on the walls of the caves ofshivering savages—the power of a living mind —the power of thought and choiceand purpose.

She was making her way back toward the cab, feeling that she wanted tolaugh, to kneel or to lift her arms, wishing she were able to release thething she felt, knowing that it had no form of expression.

She stopped She saw Rearden standing by the steps of the door to the cab.He was looking at her as if he knew why she had escaped and what she felt.They stood still, their bodies becoming a glance that met across a narrowpassage. The beating within her was one with the beating of the motors—andshe felt as if both came from him; the pounding rhythm wiped out her will.They went back to the cab, silently, knowing that there had been a momentwhich was not to be mentioned between them.

The cliffs ahead were a bright, liquid gold. Strips of shadow werelengthening in the valleys below. The sun was descending to the peaks in thewest. They were going west and up, toward the sun.

The sky had deepened to the greenish-blue of the rails, when they sawsmokestacks in a distant valley. It was one of Colorado's new towns, thetowns that had grown like a radiation from the Wyatt oil fields. She saw theangular lines of modern houses, flat roofs, great sheets of windows. It wastoo far to distinguish people. In the moment when she thought that they wouldnot be watching the train at that distance, a rocket shot out from among thebuildings, rose high above the town and broke as a fountain of gold starsagainst the darkening sky. Men whom she could not see, were seeing the streakof the train on the side of the mountain, and were sending a salute, a lonelyplume of fire in the dusk, the symbol of celebration or of a call for help.

Beyond the next turn, in a sudden view of distance, she saw two dots ofelectric light, white and red, low in the sky. They were not airplanes '—shesaw the cones of metal girders supporting them—and in the moment when sheknew that they were the derricks of Wyatt Oil, she saw that the track wassweeping downward, that the earth flared open, as if the mountains were flungapart—and at the bottom, at the foot of the Wyatt hill, across the dark crackof a canyon, she saw the bridge of Rearden Metal.

They were flying down, she forgot the careful grading, the great curves ofthe gradual descent, she felt as if the train were plunging downward, headfirst, she watched the bridge growing to meet them—a small, square tunnel ofmetal lace work, a few beams criss-crossed through the air, green-blue andglowing, struck by a long ray of sunset light from some crack in the barrier

of mountains. There were people by the bridge, the dark splash of a crowd,but they rolled off the edge of her consciousness. She heard the rising,accelerating sound of the wheels—and some theme of music, heard to the rhythmof wheels, kept tugging at her mind, growing louder—it burst suddenly withinthe cab, but she knew that it was only in her mind; the Fifth Concerto byRichard Halley—she thought: did he write it for this? had he known a feelingsuch as this?—

they were going faster, they had left the ground, she thought, flung offby the mountains as by a springboard, they were now sailing through space-it's not a fair test, she thought, we're not going to touch that bridge—shesaw Rearden's face above her, she held his eyes and her head leaned back, sothat her face lay still on the air under his face—

they heard a ringing blast of metal, they heard a drum roll under theirfeet, the diagonals of the bridge went smearing across the windows with thesound of a metal rod being run along the pickets of a fence—then the windowswere too suddenly clear, the sweep of their downward plunge was carrying themup a hill, the derricks of Wyatt Oil were reeling before them—Pat Loganturned, glancing up at Rearden with the hint of a smile—and Rearden said,"That's that."

The sign on the edge of a roof read: Wyatt Junction. She stared, feelingthat there was something odd about it, until she grasped what it was: thesign did not move. The sharpest jolt of the journey was the realization thatthe engine stood still.

She heard voices somewhere, she looked down and saw that there were peopleon the platform. Then the door of the cab was flung open, she knew that shehad to be first to descend, and she stepped to the edge.

For the flash of an instant, she felt the slenderness of her own body, thelightness of standing full-figure in a current of open air. She gripped themetal bars and started down the ladder. She was halfway down when she feltthe palms of a man's hands slam tight against her ribs and waistline, she wastorn off the steps, swung through the air and deposited on the ground. Shecould not believe that the young boy laughing in her face was Ellis Wyatt.The tense, scornful face she remembered, now had the purity, the eagerness,the joyous benevolence of a child in the kind of world for which he had beenintended.

She was leaning against his shoulder, feeling unsteady on the motionlessground, with his arm about her, she was laughing, she was listening to thethings he said, she was answering, "But didn't you know we would?"

In a moment, she saw the faces around them. They were the bondholders ofthe John Gait Line, the men who were Nielsen Motors, Hammond Cars, StocktonFoundry and all the others. She shook their hands, and there were nospeeches; she stood against Ellis Wyatt, sagging a little, brushing her hairaway from her eyes, leaving smudges of soot on her forehead. She shook thehands of the men of the train's crew, without words, with the seal of thegrins on their faces. There were flash bulbs exploding around them, and menwaving to them from the riggings of the oil wells on the slopes of themountains. Above her head, above the heads of the crowd, the letters TT on asilver shield were hit by the last ray of a sinking sun.

Ellis Wyatt had taken charge. He was leading her somewhere, the sweep ofhis arm cutting a path for them through the crowd, when one of the men withthe cameras broke through to her side. "Miss Taggart,"

he called, "will you give us a message for the public?" Ellis Wyattpointed at the long string of freight cars. "She has."

Then she was sitting in the back seat of an open car, driving up thecurves of a mountain road. The man beside her was Rearden, the driver wasEllis Wyatt.

They stopped at a house that stood on the edge of a cliff, with no otherhabitation anywhere in sight, with the whole of the oil fields spread on theslopes below.

"Why, of course you're staying at my house overnight, both of you,"

said Ellis Wyatt, as they went in. "Where did you expect to stay?"

She laughed. "I don't know, I hadn't thought of it at all."

"The nearest town is an hour's drive away. That's where your crew hasgone: your boys at the division point are giving a party in their honor. Sois the whole town. But I told Ted Nielsen and the others that we'd have nobanquets for you and no oratory. Unless you'd like it?"

"God, no!" she said. "Thanks, Ellis."

It was dark when they sat at the dinner table in a room that had largewindows and a few pieces of costly furniture. The dinner was served by asilent figure in a white jacket, the only other inhabitant of the house, anelderly Indian with a stony face and a courteous manner. A few points of firewere scattered through the room, running over and out beyond the windows: thecandles on the table, the lights on the derricks, and the stars.

"Do you think that you have your hands full now?" Ellis Wyatt was saying."Just give me a year and I'll give you something to keep you busy. Two tanktrains a day, Dagny? It's going to be four or six or as many as you wish meto fill." His hand swept over the lights on the mountains. "This? It'snothing, compared to what I've got coming." He pointed west. "The BuenaEsperanza Pass. Five miles from here. Everybody's wondering what I'm doingwith it. Oil shale. How many years ago was it that they gave up trying to getoil from shale, because it was too expensive? Well, wait till you see theprocess I've developed. It will be the cheapest oil ever to splash in theirfaces, and an unlimited supply of it, an untapped supply that will make thebiggest oil pool look like a mud puddle. Did I order a pipe line? Hank, youand I will have to build pipe lines in all directions to . . . Oh, I beg yourpardon. I don't believe I introduced myself when I spoke to you at thestation. I haven't even told you my name."

Rearden grinned. "I've guessed it by now."

"I'm sorry, I don't like to be careless, but I was too excited."

"What were you excited about?" asked Dagny, her eyes narrowed in mockery.

Wyatt held her glance for a moment; his answer had a tone of solemnintensity strangely conveyed by a smiling voice. "About the most beautifulslap in the face I ever got and deserved."

"Do you mean, for our first meeting?"

"I mean, for our first meeting."

"Don't. You were right."

"I was. About everything but you. Dagny, to find an exception after yearsof . . . Oh, to hell with them! Do you want me to turn on the radio and hearwhat they're saying about the two of you tonight?"

"No. "

"Good. I don't want to hear them. Let them swallow their own speeches.They're all climbing on the band wagon now. We're the band."He glanced at Rearden. "What are you smiling at?""I've always been curious to see what you're like.""I've never had a chance to be what I'm like—except tonight.""Do you live here alone, like this, miles away from everything?"Wyatt pointed at the window. "I'm a couple of steps away from—everything.""What about people?"

"I have guest rooms for the kind of people who come to see me on business.I want as many miles as possible between myself and all the other kinds." Heleaned forward to refill their wine glasses. "Hank, why don't you move toColorado? To hell with New York and the Eastern Seaboard! This is the capital

of the Renaissance. The Second Renaissance—not of oil paintings andcathedrals—but of oil derricks, power plants, and motors made of ReardenMetal. They had the Stone Age and the Iron Age and now they're going to callit the Rearden Metal Age—because there's no limit to what your Metal has madepossible."

"I'm going to buy a few square miles of Pennsylvania," said Rearden.

"The ones around my mills. It would have been cheaper to build a branchhere, as I wanted, but you know why I can't, and to hell with them! Ill beatthem anyway. I'm going to expand the mills—and if she can give me three-dayfreight service to Colorado, I'll give you a race for who's going to be thecapital of the Renaissance!"

"Give me a year," said Dagny, "of running trains on the John Gait Line,give me time to pull the Taggart system together—and I'll give you three-dayfreight service across the continent, on a Rearden Metal track from ocean toocean! "

"Who was it that said he needed a fulcrum?" said Ellis Wyatt. "Give me anunobstructed right-of-way and I'll show them how to move the earth!"

She wondered what it was that she liked about the sound of Wyatt'slaughter. Their voices, even her own, had a tone she had never heard before.When they rose from the table, she was astonished to notice that the candleswere the only illumination of the room: she had felt as if she were sittingin a violent light.

Ellis Wyatt picked up his glass, looked at their faces and said, "To theworld as it seems to be right now!"

He emptied the glass with a single movement.

She heard the crash of the glass against the wall in the same instant thatshe saw a circling current—from the curve of his body to the sweep of his armto the terrible violence of his hand that flung the glass across the room. Itwas not the conventional gesture meant as celebration, it was the gesture ofa rebellious anger, the vicious gesture which is movement substituted for ascream of pain.

"Ellis," she whispered, "what's the matter?"

He turned to look at her. With the same violent suddenness, his eyes wereclear, his face was calm; what frightened her was seeing him smile gently."I'm sorry," he said. "Never mind. We'll try to think that it will last."

The earth below was streaked with moonlight, when Wyatt led them up anoutside stairway to the second floor of the house, to the open gallery at thedoors of the guest rooms. He wished them good night and they heard his stepsdescending the stairs. The moonlight seemed to drain sound as it drainedcolor. The steps rolled into a distant past, and when they died, the silencehad the quality of a solitude that had lasted for a long time, as if noperson were left anywhere in reach.

She did not turn to the door of her room. He did not move. At the level oftheir feet, there was nothing but a thin railing and a spread of space.Angular tiers descended below, with shadows repeating the steel tracery ofderricks, criss-crossing sharp, black lines on patches of glowing rock. A fewlights, white and red, trembled in the clear air, like drops of rain caughton the edges of steel girders. Far in the distance, three small drops weregreen, strung in a line along the Taggart track.

Beyond them, at the end of space, at the foot of a white curve, hung awebbed rectangle which was the bridge.

She felt a rhythm without sound or movement, a sense of beating tension,as if the wheels of the John Gait Line were still speeding on.

Slowly, in answer and in resistance to an unspoken summons, she turned andlooked at him.

The look she saw on his face made her know for the first time that she hadknown this would be the end of the journey. That look was not as men are

taught to represent it, it was not a matter of loose muscles, hanging lipsand mindless hunger. The lines of his face were pulled tight, giving it apeculiar purity, a sharp precision of form, making it clean and young. Hismouth was taut, the lips faintly drawn inward, stressing the outline of itsshape. Only his eyes were blurred, their lower lids swollen and raised, theirglance intent with that which resembled hatred and pain.

The shock became numbness spreading through her body—she felt a tightpressure in her throat and her stomach—she was conscious of nothing but asilent convulsion that made her unable to breathe. But what she felt, withoutwords for it, was: Yes, Hank, yes—now—because it is part of the same battle,in some way that I can't name . . . because it is our being, against theirs .. . our great capacity, for which they torture us, the capacity of happiness. . . Now, like this, without words or questions . . . because we want it. .

It was like an act of hatred, like the cutting blow of a lash encirclingher body: she felt his arms around her, she felt her legs pulled forwardagainst him and her chest bent back under the pressure of his, his mouth onhers.

Her hand moved from his shoulders to his waist to his legs, releasing theunconfessed desire of her every meeting with him. When she tore her mouthaway from him, she was laughing soundlessly, in triumph, as if saying: HankRearden—the austere, unapproachable Hank Rearden of the monk like office, thebusiness conferences, the harsh bargains—do you remember them now?—I'mthinking of it, for the pleasure of knowing that I've brought you to this. Hewas not smiling, his face was tight, it was the face of an enemy, he jerkedher head and caught her mouth again, as if he were inflicting a wound.

She felt him trembling and she thought that this was the kind of cry shehad wanted to tear from him—this surrender through the shreds of his torturedresistance. Yet she knew, at the same time, that the triumph was his, thather laughter was her tribute to him, that her defiance was submission, thatthe purpose of all of her violent strength was only to make his victory thegreater—he was holding her body against his, as if stressing his wish to lether know that she was now only a tool for the satisfaction of his desire—andhis victory, she knew, was her wish to let him reduce her to that. Whatever Iam, she thought, whatever pride of person I may hold, the pride of mycourage, of my work, of my mind and my freedom—that is what I offer you forthe pleasure of your body, that is what I want you to use in your service—andthat you want it to serve you is the greatest reward I can have.

There were lights burning in the two rooms behind them. He took her wristand threw her inside his room, making the gesture tell her that he needed nosign of consent or resistance. He locked the door, watching her face.Standing straight, holding his glance, she extended her arm to the lamp onthe table and turned out the light. He approached. He turned the light onagain, with a single, contemptuous jerk of his wrist.

She saw him smile for the first time, a slow, mocking, sensual smile thatstressed the purpose of his action.

He was holding her half-stretched across the bed, he was tearing herclothes off. while her face was pressed against him, her mouth, moving downthe line of his neck, down his shoulder. She knew that every gesture of herdesire for him struck him like a blow, that there was some shudder ofincredulous anger within him—yet that no gesture would satisfy his greed forevery evidence of her desire.

He stood looking down at her naked body, he leaned over, she heard hisvoice—it was more a statement of contemptuous triumph than a question: "Youwant it?" Her answer was more a gasp than a word, her eyes closed, her mouthopen: "Yes."

She knew that what she felt with the skin of her arms was the cloth of hisshirt, she knew that the lips she felt on her mouth were his, but in the restof her there was no distinction between his being and her own, as there wasno division between body and spirit. Through all the steps of the yearsbehind them, the steps down a course chosen in the courage of a singleloyalty: their love of existence—chosen in the knowledge that nothing will begiven, that one must make one's own desire and every shape of itsfulfillment—through the steps of shaping metal, rails and motors—they hadmoved by the power of the thought that one remakes the earth for one'senjoyment, that man's spirit gives meaning to insentient matter by molding itto serve one's chosen goal. The course led them to the moment when, in answerto the highest of one's values, in an admiration not to be expressed by anyother form of tribute, one's spirit makes one's body become the tribute,recasting it—as proof, as sanction, as reward—into a single sensation of suchintensity of joy that no other sanction of one's existence is necessary. Heheard the moan of her breath, she felt the shudder of his body, in the sameinstant.

CHAPTER IXTHE SACRED AND THE PROFANE

She looked at the glowing bands on the skin of her arm, spaced likebracelets from her wrist to her shoulder. They were strips of sunlight fromthe Venetian blinds on the window of an unfamiliar room. She saw a bruiseabove her elbow, with dark beads that had been blood. Her arm lay on theblanket that covered her body. She was aware of her legs and hips, but therest of her body was only a sense of lightness, as if it were stretchedrestfully across the air in a place that looked like a cage made of sunrays.

Turning to look at him, she thought: From his aloofness, from his mannerof glass-enclosed formality, from his pride in never being made to feelanything—to this, to Hank Rearden in bed beside her, after hours of aviolence which they could not name now, not in words or in daylight—but whichwas in their eyes, as they looked at each other, which they wanted to name,to stress, to throw at each other's face.

He saw the face of a young girl, her lips suggesting a smile, as if hernatural state of relaxation were a state of radiance, a lock of hair fallingacross her cheek to the curve of a naked shoulder, her eyes looking at him asif she were ready to accept anything he might wish to say, as she had beenready to accept anything he had wished to do.

He reached over and moved the lock of hair from her cheek, cautiously, asif it were fragile. He held it back with his fingertips and looked at herface. Then his fingers closed suddenly in her hair and he raised the lock tohis lips. The way he pressed his mouth to it was tenderness, but the way hisfingers held it was despair.

He dropped back on the pillow and lay still, his eyes closed. His faceseemed young, at peace. Seeing it for a moment without the reins of tension,she realized suddenly the extent of the unhappiness he had borne; but it'spast now, she thought, it's over.

He got up, not looking at her. His face was blank and closed again.

He picked up his clothes from the floor and proceeded to dress, standingin the middle of the room, half-turned away from her. He acted, not as if shewasn't present, but as if it did not matter that she was. His movements, ashe buttoned his shirt, as he buckled the belt of his slacks, had the rapidprecision of performing a duty.

She lay back on the pillow, watching him, enjoying the sight of his figurein motion. She liked the gray slacks and shirt—the expert mechanic of theJohn Gait Line, she thought, in the stripes of sunlight and shadow, like aconvict behind bars. But they were not bars any longer, they were the cracksof a wall which the John Gait Line had broken, the advance notice of whatawaited them outside, beyond the Venetian blinds—she thought of the tripback, on the new rail, with the first train from Wyatt Junction—the trip backto her office in the Taggart Building and to all the things now open for herto win—but she was free to let it wait, she did not want to think of it, shewas thinking of the first touch of his mouth on hers—she was free to feel it,to hold a moment when nothing else was of any concern—she smiled defiantly atthe strips of sky beyond the blinds.

"I want you to know this."

He stood by the bed, dressed, looking down at her. His voice hadpronounced it evenly, with great clarity and no inflection. She looked up athim obediently. He said: "What I feel for you is contempt. But it's nothing,compared to the contempt I feel for myself. I don't love you. I've neverloved anyone.

I wanted you from the first moment I saw you. I wanted you as one wants awhore—for the same reason and purpose. I spent two years damning myself,because I thought you were above a desire of this kind.

You're not. You're as vile an animal as I am. I should loathe mydiscovering it. I don't. Yesterday, I would have killed anyone who'd tell methat you were capable of doing what I've had you do. Today, I would give mylife not to let it be otherwise, not to have you be anything but the bitchyou are. All the greatness that I saw in you—I would not take it in exchangefor the obscenity of your talent at an animal's sensation of pleasure. Wewere two great beings, you and I, proud of our strength, weren't we? Well,this is all that's left of us—and I want no self-deception about it."

He spoke slowly, as if lashing himself with his words. There was no soundof emotion in his voice, only the lifeless pull of effort; it was not thetone of a man's willingness to speak, but the ugly, tortured sound of duty.

"I held it as my honor that I would never need anyone. I need you.

It had been my pride that I had always acted on my convictions. I've givenin to a desire which I despise. It is a desire that has reduced my mind, mywill, my being, my power to exist into an abject dependence upon you—not evenupon the Dagny Taggart whom I admired—but upon your body, your hands, yourmouth and the few seconds of a convulsion of your muscles. I had never brokenmy word. Now I've broken an oath I gave for life. I had never committed anact that had to be hidden. Now I am to lie, to sneak, to hide. Whatever Iwanted, I was free to proclaim it aloud and achieve it in the sight of thewhole world.

Now my only desire is one I loathe to name even to myself. But it is myonly desire. I'm going to have you—I'd give up everything I own for it, themills, the Metal, the achievement of my whole life. I'm going to have you atthe price of more than myself: at the price of my self esteem—and I want youto know it. I want no pretense, no evasion, no silent indulgence, with thenature of our actions left unnamed. I want no pretense about love, value,loyalty or respect. I want no shred of honor left to us, to hide behind. I'venever begged for mercy. I've chosen to do this—and I'll take all theconsequences, including the full recognition of my choice. It's depravity—andI accept it as such—and there is no height of virtue that I wouldn't give upfor it. Now if you wish to slap my face, go ahead. I wish you would."

She had listened, sitting up straight, holding the blanket clutched at herthroat to cover her body. At first, he had seen her eyes growing dark withincredulous shock. Then it seemed to him that she was listening with greaterattentiveness, but seeing more than his face, even though her eyes were fixedon his. She looked as if she were studying intently some revelation that hadnever confronted her before. He felt as if some ray of light were growingstronger on his face, because he saw its reflection on hers, as she watchedhim—he saw the shock vanishing, then the wonder—he saw her face beingsmoothed into a strange serenity that seemed quiet and glittering at once.

When he stopped, she burst out laughing.

The shock to him was that he heard no anger in her laughter. She laughedsimply, easily, in joyous amusement, in release, not as one laughs at thesolution of a problem, but at the discovery that no problem had ever existed.

She threw the blanket off with a stressed, deliberate sweep of her arm.

She stood up. She saw her clothes on the floor and kicked them aside.

She stood facing him, naked. She said: "I want you, Hank. I'm much more ofan animal than you think. I wanted you from the first moment I saw you—andthe only thing I'm ashamed of is that I did not know it. I did not know why,for two years, the brightest moments I found were the ones in your office,where I could lift my head to look up at you. I did not know the nature ofwhat I felt in your presence, nor the reason. I know it now. That is all Iwant, Hank. I want you in my bed—and you are free of me for all the rest ofyour time. There's nothing you'll have to pretend—don't think of me, don'tfeel, don't care—I do not want your mind, your will, your being or your soul,so long as it's to me that you will come for that lowest one of your desires.

I am an animal who wants nothing but that sensation of pleasure which youdespise--but I want it from you. You'd give up any height of virtue for it,while I—I haven't any to give up. There's none I seek or wish to reach. I amso low that I would exchange the greatest sight of beauty in the world forthe sight of your figure in the cab of a railroad engine. And seeing it, Iwould not be able to see it indifferently. You don't have to fear that you'renow dependent upon me. It's I who will depend on any whim of yours. You'llhave me any time you wish, anywhere, on any. terms. Did you call it theobscenity of my talent? It's such that it gives you a safer hold on me thanon any other property you own. You may dispose of me as you please—I'm notafraid to admit it—L have nothing to protect from you and nothing to reserve.You think that this is a threat to your achievement, but it is not to mine. Iwill sit at my desk, and work, and when the things around me get hard tobear, I will think that for my reward I will be in your bed that night. Didyou call it depravity? I am much more depraved than you are: you hold it asyour guilt, and I—as my pride. I'm more proud of it than of anything I'vedone, more proud than of building the Line.

If I'm asked to name my proudest attainment, I will say: I have slept withHank Rearden. I had earned it.'l

When he threw her down on the bed, their bodies met like the two soundsthat broke against each other in the air of the room: the sound of histortured moan and of her laughter.

The rain was invisible in the darkness of the streets, but it hung likethe sparkling fringe of a lampshade under the corner light. Fumbling in hispockets, James Taggart discovered that he had lost his handkerchief.

He swore half-aloud, with resentful malice, as if the loss, the rain andhis head cold were someone's personal conspiracy against him.

There was a thin gruel of mud on the pavements; he felt a gluey suctionunder his shoe soles and a chill slipping down past his collar. He did notwant to walk or to stop. He had no place to go.

Leaving his office, after the meeting of the Board of Directors, he hadrealized suddenly that there were no other appointments, that he had a longevening ahead and no one to help him kill it. The front pages of thenewspapers were screaming of the triumph of the John Gait Line, as the radioshad screamed it yesterday and all through the night. The name of TaggartTranscontinental was stretched in headlines across the continent, like itstrack, and he had smiled in answer to the congratulations. He had smiled,seated at the bead of the long table, at the Board meeting, while theDirectors spoke about the soaring rise of the Taggart stock on the Exchange,while they cautiously asked to see his written agreement with his sister—justin case, they said—and commented that it was fine, it was hole proof, therewas no doubt but that she would have to turn the Line over to TaggartTranscontinental at once, they spoke about their brilliant future and thedebt of gratitude which the company owed to James Taggart.

He had sat through the meeting, wishing it were over with, so that hecould go home. Then he had stepped out into the street and realized that homewas the one place where he dared not go tonight. He could not be alone, notin the next few hours, yet there was nobody to call.

He did not want to see people. He kept seeing the eyes of the men of theBoard when they spoke about his greatness: a sly, filmy look that heldcontempt for him and, more terrifyingly, for themselves.

He walked, head down, a needle of rain pricking the skin of his neck oncein a while. He looked away whenever he passed a newsstand. The papers seemedto shriek at him the name of the John Gait Line, and another name which hedid not want to hear: Ragnar Danneskjold. A ship bound for the People's Stateof Norway with an Emergency Gift cargo of machine tools had been seized byRagnar Danneskjold last night. That story disturbed him in some personal

manner which he could not explain. The feeling seemed to have some quality incommon with the things he felt about the John Gait Line.

It's because he had a cold, he thought; he wouldn't feel this way if hedidn't have a cold; a man couldn't be expected to be in top form when he hada cold—he couldn't help it—what did they expect him to do tonight, sing anddance?—he snapped the question angrily at the unknown judges of hisunwitnessed mood. He fumbled for his handkerchief again, cursed and decidedthat he'd better stop somewhere to buy some paper tissues.

Across the square of what had once been a busy neighborhood, he saw thelighted windows of a dime store, still open hopefully at this late hour.There's another one that will go out of business pretty soon, he thought ashe crossed the square; the thought gave him pleasure.

There were glaring lights inside, a few tired salesgirls among a spread ofdeserted counters, and the screaming of a phonograph record being played fora lone, listless customer in a corner. The music swallowed the sharp edges ofTaggart's voice: he asked for paper tissues in a tone which implied that thesalesgirl was responsible for his cold. The girl turned to the counter behindher, but turned back once to glance swiftly at his face. She took a packet,but stopped, hesitating, studying him with peculiar curiosity.

"Are you James Taggart?" she asked.

"Yes!" he snapped. "Why?"

"Oh! "

She gasped like a child at a burst of firecrackers; she was looking at himwith a glance which he had thought to be reserved only for movie stars.

"I saw your picture in the paper this morning, Mr. Taggart," she said veryrapidly, a faint flush appearing on her face and vanishing. "It said what agreat achievement it was and how it was really you who had done it all, onlyyou didn't want it to be known."

"Oh," said Taggart. He was smiling.

"You look just like your picture," she said in immense astonishment, andadded, "Imagine you walking in here like this, in person!""Shouldn't I?" His tone was amused.

"I mean, everybody's talking about it, the whole country, and you're theman who did it—and here you are! I've never seen an important person before.I've never been so close to anything important, I mean to any newspapernews."

He had never had the experience of seeing his presence give color to aplace he entered: the girl looked as if she was not tired any longer, as ifthe dime store had become a scene of drama and wonder.

"Mr. Taggart, is it true, what they said about you in the paper?"

"What did they say?"

"About your secret."

"What secret?"

"Well, they said that when everybody was fighting about your bridge,whether it would stand or not, you didn't argue with them, you just wentahead, because you knew it would stand, when nobody else was sure of it—sothe Line was a Taggart project and you were the guiding spirit behind thescenes, but you kept it secret, because you didn't care whether you gotcredit for it or not."

He had seen the mimeographed release of his Public Relations Department."Yes," he said, "it's true." The way she looked at him made him feel as if itwere.

"It was wonderful of you, Mr. Taggart."

"Do you always remember what you read in the newspapers, so well, in suchdetail?"

"Why, yes, I guess so—all the interesting things. The big things. I liketo read about them. Nothing big ever happens to me."

She said it gaily, without self-pity. There was a young, determinedbrusqueness in her voice and movements. She had a head of reddish browncurls, wide-set eyes, a few freckles on the bridge of an upturned nose. Hethought that one would call her face attractive if one ever noticed it, butthere was no particular reason to notice it. It was a common little face,except for a look of alertness, of eager interest, a look that expected theworld to contain an exciting secret behind every corner.

"Mr. Taggart, how does it feel to be a great man?"

"How does it feel to be a little girl?"

She laughed. "Why, wonderful."

"Then you're better off than I am."

"Oh, how can you say such a—"

"Maybe you're lucky if you don't have anything to do with the big eventsin the newspapers. Big. What do you call big, anyway?""Why . . . important.""What's important?"

"You're the one who ought to tell me that, Mr. Taggart.""Nothing's important."

She looked at him incredulously. "You, of all people, saying that tonightof all nights!"

"1 don't feel wonderful at all, if that's what you want to know. I'venever felt less wonderful in my life."

He was astonished to see her studying his face with a look of concern suchas no one had ever granted him. "You're worn out, Mr. Taggart,"

she said earnestly. "Tell them to go to hell."

"Whom?"

"Whoever's getting you down. It isn't right,""What isn't?"

"That you should feel this way. You've had a tough time, but you've lickedthem all, so you ought to enjoy yourself now. You've earned it.""And how do you propose that I enjoy myself?"

"Oh, I don't know. But I thought you'd be having a celebration tonight, aparty with all the big shots, and champagne, and things given to you, likekeys to cities, a real swank party like that—instead of walking around all byyourself, shopping for paper handkerchiefs, of all fool things!"

"You give me those handkerchiefs, before you forget them altogether," hesaid, handing her a dime. "And as to the swank party, did it occur to youthat I might not want to see anybody tonight?"

She considered it earnestly. "No," she said, "I hadn't thought of it.

But I can see why you wouldn't."

"Why?" It was a question to which he bad no answer.

"Nobody's really good enough for you, Mr. Taggart," she answered verysimply, not as flattery, but as a matter of fact."Is that what you think?"

"I don't think I like people very much, Mr. Taggart. Not most of them.""I don't either. Not any of them."

"I thought a man like you—you wouldn't know how mean they can be and howthey try to step on you and ride on your back, if you let them. I thought thebig men in the world could get away from them and not have to be flea-baitall of the time, but maybe I was wrong."

"What do you mean, flea-bait?"

"Oh, it's just something I tell myself when things get tough—that I've gotto beat my way out to where I won't feel like I'm flea-bitten all the time byall kinds of lousiness—but maybe it's the same anywhere, only the fleas getbigger."

"Much bigger."

She remained silent, as if considering something. "It's funny," she saidsadly to some thought of her own."What's funny?"

"I read a book once where it said that great men are always unhappy, andthe greater—the unhappier. It didn't make sense to me. But maybe it's true.""It's much truer than you think."She looked away, her face disturbed.

"Why do you worry so much about the great men?" he asked. "What are you, ahero worshipper of some kind?"

She turned to look at him and he saw the light of an inner smile, whileher face remained solemnly grave; it was the most eloquently personal glancehe had ever seen directed at himself, while she answered in a quiet,impersonal voice, "Mr. Taggart, what else is there to look up to?"

A screeching sound, neither quite bell nor buzzer, rang out suddenly andwent on ringing with nerve-grating insistence.

She jerked her head, as if awakening at the scream of an alarm clock, thensighed. "That's closing time, Mr. Taggart," she said regretfully.

"Go get your hat—I'll wait for you outside," he said.

She stared at him, as if among all of life's possibilities this was oneshe had never held as conceivable."No kidding?" she whispered."No kidding."

She whirled around and ran like a streak to the door of the employeeslquarters, forgetting her counter, her duties and all feminine concernabout never showing eagerness in accepting a man's invitation.

He stood looking after her for a moment, his eyes narrowed. He did notname to himself the nature of his own feeling—never to identify his emotionswas the only steadfast rule of his life; he merely felt it—and thisparticular feeling was pleasurable, which was the only identification hecared to know. But the feeling was the product of a thought he would notutter. He had often met girls of the lower classes, who had put on a brashlittle act, pretending to look up to him, spilling crude flattery for anobvious purpose; he had neither liked nor resented them; he had found a boredamusement in their company and he had granted them the status of his equalsin a game he considered natural to both players involved. This girl wasdifferent. The unuttered words in his mind were: The damn little fool meansit.

That he waited for her impatiently, when he stood in the rain on thesidewalk, that she was the one person he needed tonight, did not disturb himor strike him as a contradiction. He did not name the nature of his need. Theunnamed and the unuttered could not clash into a contradiction.

When she came out, he noted the peculiar combination of her shyness and ofher head held high. She wore an ugly raincoat, made worse by a gob of cheapjewelry on the lapel, and a small hat of plush flowers planted defiantlyamong her curls. Strangely, the lift of her head made the apparel seemattractive; it stressed how well she wore even the things she wore.

"Want to come to my place and have a drink with me?" he asked.

She nodded silently, solemnly, as if not trusting herself to find theright words of acceptance. Then she said, not looking at him, as if statingit to herself, "You didn't want to see anybody tonight, but you want o seeme. . . "He had never heard so solemn a tone of pride in anyone's voice.

She was silent, when she sat beside him in the taxicab. She looked up atthe skyscrapers they passed. After a while, she said, "I heard that thingslike this happened in New York, but I never thought they'd happen to me."

"Where do you come from?"

"Buffalo."

"Got any family?"

She hesitated. "I guess so. In Buffalo.""What do you mean, you guess so?""I walked out on them.""Why?"

"I thought that if I ever was to amount to anything, I had to get awayfrom them, clean away.""Why? What happened?"

"Nothing happened. And nothing was ever going to happen. That's what Icouldn't stand."

"What do you mean?"

"Well, they . . . well, I guess I ought to tell you the truth, Mr.Taggart. My old man's never been any good, and Ma didn't care whether he wasor not, and I got sick of it always turning out that I was the only one ofthe seven of us that kept a job, and the rest of them always being out ofluck, one way or another. I thought if I didn't get out, it would get me—I'drot all the way through, like the rest of them. So I bought a railroad ticketone day and left. Didn't say good-bye. They didn't even know I was going."She gave a soft, startled little laugh at a sudden thought. "Mr. Taggart,"she said, "it was a Taggart train."

"When did you come here?"

"Six months ago."

"And you're all alone?"

"Yes," she said happily.

"What was it you wanted to do?"

"Well, you know—make something of myself, get somewhere.""Where?"

"Oh, I don't know, but . . . but people do things in the world. 1

saw pictures of New York and I thought"—she pointed at the giant buildingsbeyond the streaks of rain on the cab window—"I thought, somebody built thosebuildings—he didn't just sit and whine that the kitchen was filthy and theroof leaking and the plumbing clogged and it's a goddamn world and . . .Mr.Taggart"—she jerked her head in a shudder and looked straight at him—"we werestinking poor and not giving a damn about it. That's what I couldn't take-that they didn't really give a damn. Not enough to lift a finger. Not enoughto empty the garbage pail. And the woman next door saying it was my duty tohelp them, saying it made no difference what became of me or of her or of anyof us, because what could anybody do anyway!" Beyond the bright look of hereyes, he saw something within her that was hurt and hard.

"I don't want to talk about them," she said. "Not with you. This—mymeeting you, I mean—that's what they couldn't have. That's what I'm not goingto share with them. It's mine, not theirs."

"How old are you?" he asked.

"Nineteen."

When he looked at her in the lights of his living room, he thought thatshe'd have a good figure if she'd eat a few meals; she seemed too thin forthe height and structure of her bones. She wore a tight, shabby little blackdress, which she had tried to camouflage by the gaudy plastic braceletstinkling on her wrist. She stood looking at his room as if it were a museumwhere she must touch nothing and reverently memorize everything.

"What's your name?" he asked.

"Cherryl Brooks."

"Well, sit down."

He mixed the drinks in silence, while she waited obediently, sitting onthe edge of an armchair. When he handed her a glass, she swallowed dutifullya few times, then held the glass clutched in her hand. He knew that she didnot taste what she was drinking, did not notice it, had no time to care.

He took a gulp of his drink and put the glass down with irritation: he didnot feel like drinking, either. He paced the room sullenly, knowing that hereyes followed him, enjoying the knowledge, enjoying the sense of tremendoussignificance which his movements, his cuff links, his shoelaces, hislampshades and ashtrays acquired in that gentle, unquestioning glance.

"Mr. Taggart, what is it that makes you so unhappy?"

"Why should you care whether I am or not?"

"Because . . . well, if you haven't the right to be happy and proud, whohas?"

"That's what I want to know—who has?" He turned to her abruptly, the wordsexploding as if a safety fuse had blown. "He didn't invent iron ore and blastfurnaces, did he?"

"Who?"

"Rearden. He didn't invent smelting and chemistry and air compression. Hecouldn't have invented his Metal but for thousands and thousands of otherpeople. His Metal! Why does he think it's his? Why does he think it's hisinvention? Everybody uses the work of everybody else.

Nobody ever invents anything."

She said, puzzled, "But the iron ore and all those other things were thereall the time. Why didn't anybody else make that Metal, but Mr.Rearden did?"

"He didn't do it for any noble purpose, he did it just for his own profit,he's never done anything for any other reason."

"What's wrong with that, Mr. Taggart?" Then she laughed softly, as if atthe sudden solution of a riddle. "That's nonsense, Mr. Taggart. You don'tmean it. You know that Mr. Rearden has earned all his profits, and so haveyou. You're saying those things just to be modest, when everybody knows whata great job you people have done—you and Mr. Rearden and your sister, whomust be such a wonderful person!"

"Yeah? That's what you think. She's a hard, insensitive woman who spendsher life building tracks and bridges, not for any great ideal, but onlybecause that's what she enjoys doing. If she enjoys it, what is there toadmire about her doing it? I'm not so sure it was great—building that Linefor all those prosperous industrialists in Colorado, when there are so manypoor people in blighted areas who need transportation."

"But, Mr. Taggart, it was you who fought to build that Line."

"Yes, because it was my duty—to the company and the stockholders and ouremployees. But don't expect me to enjoy it. I'm not so sure it was great-inventing this complex new Metal, when so many nations are in need of plainiron—why, do you know that the People's State of China hasn't even got enoughnails to put wooden roofs over people's heads?"

"But . . . but I don't see that that's your fault."

"Somebody should attend to it. Somebody with the vision to see beyond hisown pocketbook. No sensitive person these days—when there's so much sufferingaround us—would devote ten years of his life to splashing about with a lot oftrick metals. You think it's great? Well, it's not any kind of superiorability, but just a hide that you couldn't pierce if you poured a ton of hisown steel over his head! There are many people of much greater ability in theworld, but you don't read about them in the headlines and you don't run togape at them at grade crossings—because they can't invent non-collapsiblebridges at a time when the suffering of mankind weighs on their spirit!"

She was looking at him silently, respectfully, her joyous eagerness toneddown, her eyes subdued. He felt better.

He picked up his drink, took a gulp, and chuckled abruptly at a suddenrecollection.

"It was funny, though, " he said, his tone easier, livelier, the tone of aconfidence to a pal. "You should have seen Orren Boyle yesterday, when the

first flash came through on the radio from Wyatt Junction! He turned green-but I mean, green, the color of a fish that's been lying around too long! Doyou know what he did last night, by way of taking the bad news? Hired himselfa suite at the Valhalla Hotel—and you know what that is—and the last I heard,he was still there today, drinking himself under the table and the beds, witha few choice friends of his and half the female population of upper AmsterdamAvenue!"

"Who is Mr. Boyle?" she asked, stupefied.

"Oh, a fat slob that's inclined to overreach himself. A smart guy who getstoo smart at times. You should have seen his face yesterday! I got a kick outof that. That—and Dr. Floyd Ferris. That smoothy didn't like it a bit, oh nota bit!—the elegant Dr. Ferris of the State Science Institute, the servant ofthe people, with the patent-leather vocabulary—but he carried it off prettywell, I must say, only you could see him squirming in every paragraph—I mean,that interview he gave out this morning, where he said, 'The country gaveRearden that Metal, now we expect him to give the country something inreturn.' That was pretty nifty, considering who's been riding on the gravytrain and . . . well, considering. That was better than Bertram Scudder—Mr.Scudder couldn't think of anything but 'No comment,' when his fellowgentlemen of the press asked him to voice his sentiments. 'No comment'—fromBertram Scudder who's never been known to shut his trap from the day he wasborn, about anything you ask him or don't ask, Abyssinian poetry or the stateof the ladies' rest rooms in the textile industry! And Dr. Pritchett, the oldfool, is going around saying that he knows for certain that Rearden didn'tinvent that Metal—because he was told, by an unnamed reliable source, thatRearden stole the formula from a penniless inventor whom he murdered!"

He was chuckling happily. She was listening as to a lecture on highermathematics, grasping nothing, not even the style of the language, a stylewhich made the mystery greater, because she was certain that it did not mean-coming from him—what it would have meant anywhere else.

He refilled his glass and drained it, but his gaiety vanished abruptly.

He slumped into an armchair, facing her, looking up at her from under hisbald forehead, his eyes blurred.

"She's coming back tomorrow," he said, with a sound like a chuckle devoidof amusement.

"Who?"

"My sister. My dear sister. Oh, she'll think she's great, won't she?""You dislike your sister, Mr. Taggart?" He made the same sound; itsmeaning was so eloquent that she needed no other answer. "Why?" she asked."Because she thinks she's so good. What right has she to think it?What right has anybody to think he's good? Nobody's any good.""You don't mean it, Mr. Taggart."

"I mean, we're only human beings—and what's a human being? A weak, ugly,sinful creature, born that way, rotten in his bones—so humility is the onevirtue he ought to practice. He ought to spend his life on his knees, beggingto be forgiven for his dirty existence. When a man thinks he's good—that'swhen he's rotten. Pride is the worst of all sins, no matter what he's done."

"But if a man knows that what he's done is good?"

"Then he ought to apologize for it."

"To whom?"

"To those who haven't done it.""I ... I don't understand."

"Of course you don't. It takes years and years of study in the higherreaches of the intellect. Have you ever heard of The MetaphysicalContradictions of the Universe, by Dr. Simon Pritchett?" She shook her head,frightened. "How do you know what's good, anyway? Who knows what's good? Whocan ever know? There are no absolutes—as Dr.

Pritchett has proved irrefutably. Nothing is absolute. Everything is amatter of opinion. How do you know that that bridge hasn't collapsed?

You only think it hasn't. How do you know that there's any bridge at all?

You think that a system of philosophy—such as Dr. Pritchett's—is justsomething academic, remote, impractical? But it isn't. Oh, boy, how itisn't! "

"But, Mr. Taggart, the Line you built-"

"Oh, what's that Line, anyway? It's only a material achievement, is thatof any importance? Is there any greatness in anything material?

Only a low animal can gape at that bridge—when there are so many higherthings in life. But do the higher things ever get recognition? Oh no! Look atpeople. All that hue and cry and front pages about some trick arrangement ofsome scraps of matter. Do they care about any nobler issue? Do they ever givefront pages to a phenomenon of the spirit? Do they notice or appreciate aperson of finer sensibility? And you wonder whether it's true that a greatman is doomed to unhappiness in this depraved world!" He leaned forward,staring at her intently. "I'll tell you . . . I'll tell you something . . .unhappiness is the hallmark of virtue. If a man is unhappy, really, trulyunhappy, it means that he is a superior sort of person."

He saw the puzzled, anxious look of her face. "But, Mr. Taggart, you goteverything you wanted. Now you have the best railroad in the country, thenewspapers call you the greatest business executive of the age, they say thestock of your company made a fortune for you overnight, you got everythingyou could ask for—aren't you glad of it?"

In the brief space of his answer, she felt frightened, sensing a suddenfear within him. He answered, "No."

She didn't know why her voice dropped to a whisper. "You'd rather thebridge had collapsed?"

"I haven't said that!" he snapped sharply. Then he shrugged and waved hishand in a gesture of contempt. "You don't understand."

"I'm sorry . . . Oh, I know that I have such an awful lot to learn!"

"I am talking about a hunger for something much beyond that bridge.

A hunger that nothing material will ever satisfy."

"What, Mr. Taggart? What is it you want?"

"Oh, there you go! The moment you ask, 'What is it?' you're back in thecrude, material world where everything's got to be tagged and measured. I'mspeaking of things that can't be named in materialistic words . . . thehigher realms of the spirit, which man can never reach. . . .

What's any human achievement, anyway? The earth is only an atom whirlingin the universe—of what importance is that bridge to the solar system?"

A sudden, happy look of understanding cleared her eyes. "It's great ofyou, Mr. Taggart, to think that your own achievement isn't good enough foryou. I guess no matter how far you've gone, you want to go still farther.You're ambitious. That's what I admire most: ambition. I mean, doing things,not stopping and giving up, but doing. I understand, Mr. Taggart . . . evenif I don't understand all the big thoughts."

"You'll learn."

"Oh, I'll work very hard to learn!"

Her glance of admiration had not changed. He walked across the room,moving in that glance as in a gentle spotlight. He went to refill his glass.A mirror hung in the niche behind the portable bar. He caught a glimpse ofhis own figure: the tall body distorted by a sloppy, sagging posture, as ifin deliberate negation of human grace, the thinning hair, the soft, sullenmouth. It struck him suddenly that she did not see him at all: what she sawwas the heroic figure of a builder, with proudly straight shoulders and wind-blown hair. He chuckled aloud, feeling that this was a good joke on her,

feeling dimly a satisfaction that resembled a sense of victory: thesuperiority of having put something over on her.

Sipping his drink, he glanced at the door of his bedroom and thought ofthe usual ending for an adventure of this kind. He thought that it would beeasy: the girl was too awed to resist. He saw the reddish-bronze sparkle ofher hair—as she sat, head bent, under a light—and a wedge of smooth, glowingskin on her shoulder. He looked away. Why bother?

—he thought.

The hint of desire that he felt, was no more than a sense of physicaldiscomfort. The sharpest impulse in his mind, nagging him to action, was notthe thought of the girl, but of all the men who would not pass up anopportunity of this kind. He admitted to himself that she was a much betterperson than Betty Pope, perhaps the best person ever offered to him. Theadmission left him indifferent. He felt no more than he had felt for BettyPope. He felt nothing. The prospect of experiencing pleasure was not worththe effort; he had no desire to experience pleasure.

"It's getting late," he said. "Where do you live? Let me give you anotherdrink and then I'll take you home."

When he said good-bye to her at the door of a miserable rooming house in aslum neighborhood, she hesitated, fighting not to ask a question which shedesperately wished to ask him, "Will I . . . " she began, and stopped.

"What?"

"No, nothing, nothing!"

He knew that the question was: "Will I see you again?" It gave himpleasure not to answer, even though he knew that she would.

She glanced up at him once more, as if it were perhaps for the last time,then said earnestly, her voice low, "Mr. Taggart, I'm very grateful to you,because you ... I mean, any other man would have tried to ... I mean,that's all he'd want, but you're so much better than that, oh, so muchbetter!"

He leaned closer to her with a faint, interested smile. "Would you have?"he asked.

She drew back from him, in sudden terror at her own words. "Oh, I didn'tmean it that way!" she gasped. "Oh God, I wasn't hinting or . . .

or . . ." She blushed furiously, whirled around and ran, vanishing up thelong, steep stairs of the rooming house.

He stood on the sidewalk, feeling an odd, heavy, foggy sense ofsatisfaction: feeling as if he had committed an act of virtue—and as if hehad taken his revenge upon every person who had stood cheering along thethree-hundred-mile track of the John Gait Line.

When their train reached Philadelphia, Rearden left her without a word, asif the nights of their return journey deserved no acknowledgment in thedaylight reality of crowded station platforms and moving engines, the realityhe respected. She went on to New York, alone. But late that evening, thedoorbell of her apartment rang and Dagny knew that she had expected it.

He said nothing when he entered, he looked at her, making his silentpresence more intimate a greeting than words. There was the faint suggestionof a contemptuous smile in his face, at once admitting and mocking hisknowledge of her hours of impatience and his own. He stood in the middle ofher living room, looking slowly around him; this was her apartment, the oneplace in the city that had been the focus of two years of his torment, as theplace he could not think about and did, the place he could not enter—and wasnow entering with the casual, unannounced right of an owner. He sat down inan armchair, stretching his legs forward—and she stood before him, almost asif she needed his permission to sit down and it gave her pleasure to wait.

"Shall I tell you that you did a magnificent job, building that Line?"

he asked. She glanced at him in astonishment; he had never paid her opencompliments of that kind; the admiration in his voice was genuine, but thehint of mockery remained in his face, and she felt as if he were speaking tosome purpose which she could not guess. "I've spent all day answeringquestions about you—and about the Line, the Metal and the future. That, andcounting the orders for the Metal.

They're coming in at the rate of thousands of tons an hour. When was it,nine months ago?—I couldn't get a single answer anywhere. Today, I had to cutoff my phone, not to listen to all the people who wanted to speak to mepersonally about their urgent need of Rearden Metal.

What did you do today?"

"I don't know. Tried to listen to Eddie's reports—tried to get away frompeople—tried to find the rolling stock to put more trains on the John GaitLine, because the schedule I'd planned won't be enough for the businessthat's piled up in just three days."

"A great many people wanted to see you today, didn't they?"

"Why. yes."

"They'd have given anything just for a word with you, wouldn't they?" '"I ... I suppose so."

"The reporters kept asking me what you were like. A young boy from a localsheet kept saying that you were a great woman. He said he'd be afraid tospeak to you, if he ever had the chance. He's right. That future that they'reall talking and trembling about—it will be as you made it, because you hadthe courage none of them could conceive of.

All the roads to wealth that they're scrambling for now, it's yourstrength that broke them open. The strength to stand against everyone.

The strength to recognize no will but your own."

She caught the sinking gasp of her breath: she knew his purpose. She stoodstraight, her arms at her sides, her face austere, as if in unflinchingendurance; she stood under the praise as under a lashing of insults.

"They kept asking you questions, too, didn't they?" He spoke intently,leaning forward. "And they looked at you with admiration.

They looked, as if you stood on a mountain peak and they could only taketheir hats off to you across the great distance. Didn't they?"

"Yes," she whispered.

"They looked as if they knew that one may not approach you or speak inyour presence or touch a fold of your dress. They knew it and it's true. Theylooked at you with respect, didn't they? They looked up to you?"

He seized her arm, threw her down on her knees, twisting her body againsthis legs, and bent down to kiss her mouth. She laughed soundlessly, herlaughter mocking, but her eyes half-closed, veiled with pleasure.

Hours later, when they lay in bed together, his hand moving over her body,he asked suddenly, throwing her back against the curve of his arm, bendingover her—and she knew, by the intensity of his face, by the sound of a gaspsomewhere in the quality of his voice, even though his voice was low andsteady, that the question broke out of him as if it were worn by the hours oftorture he had spent with it: "Who were the other men that had you?"

He looked at her as if the question were a sight visualized in everydetail, a sight he loathed, but would not abandon; she heard the contempt inhis voice, the hatred, the suffering—and an odd eagerness that did notpertain to torture; he had asked the question, holding her body tight againsthim.

She answered evenly, but he saw a dangerous flicker in her eyes, as of awarning that she understood him too well. "There was only one other, Hank.""When?"

"When I was seventeen.'1"Did it last?"

"For some years.""Who was he?"

She drew back, lying against his arm; he leaned closer, his face taut; sheheld his eyes. "I won't answer you.""Did you love him?""I won't answer."

"Did you like sleeping with him?""Yes ! "

The laughter in her eyes made it sound like a slap across his face, thelaughter of her knowledge that this was the answer he dreaded and wanted.

He twisted her arms behind her, holding her helpless, her breasts pressedagainst him; she felt the pain ripping through her shoulders, she heard theanger in his words and the huskiness of pleasure in his voice: "Who was he?"

She did not answer, she looked at him, her eyes dark and oddly brilliant,and he saw that the shape of her mouth, distorted by pain, was the shape of amocking smile.

He felt it change to a shape of surrender, under the touch of his lips.

He held her body as if the violence and the despair of the way he took hercould wipe his unknown rival out of existence, out of her past, and more: asif it could transform any part of her, even the rival, into an instrument ofhis pleasure. He knew, by the eagerness of her movement as her arms seizedhim, that this was the way she wanted to be taken.

-k -k -k

The silhouette of a conveyor belt moved against the strips of fire in thesky, raising coal to the top of a distant tower, as if an inexhaustiblenumber of small black buckets rode out of the earth in a diagonal line acrossthe sunset. The harsh, distant clatter kept going through the rattle of thechains which a young man in blue overalls was fastening over the machinery,securing it to the flatcars lined on the siding of the Quinn Ball BearingCompany of Connecticut.

Mr. Mowen, of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company across the street,stood by, watching. He had stopped to watch, on his way home from his ownplant. He wore a light overcoat stretched over his short, paunchy figure, anda derby hat over his graying, blondish head.

There was a first touch of September chill in the air. All the gates ofthe Quinn plant buildings stood wide open, while men and cranes moved themachinery out; like taking the vital organs and leaving a carcass, thoughtMr. Mowen.

"Another one?" asked Mr. Mowen, jerking his thumb at the plant, eventhough he knew the answer.

"Huh?" asked the young man, who had not noticed him standing there."Another company moving to Colorado?""Uh-huh."

"It's the third one from Connecticut in the last two weeks," said Mr.

Mowen. "And when you look at what's happening in New Jersey, Rhode Island,Massachusetts and all along the Atlantic coast . . ."

The young man was not looking and did not seem to listen. "It's like aleaking faucet," said Mr. Mowen, "and all the water's running out toColorado. All the money." The young man flung the chain across and followedit deftly, climbing over the big shape covered with canvas.

"You'd think people would have some feeling for their native state, someloyalty . . . But they're running away. I don't know what's happening topeople. "

"It's the Bill," said the young man."What Bill?"

"The Equalization of Opportunity Bill.""How do you mean?"

"I hear Mr. Quinn was making plans a year ago to open a branch inColorado. The Bill knocked that out cold. So now he's made up his mind tomove there, lock, stock and barrel."

"I don't see where that makes it right. The Bill was necessary. It's arotten shame—old firms that have been here for generations . . .

There ought to be a law . . ."

The young man worked swiftly, competently, as if he enjoyed it. Behindhim. the conveyor belt kept rising and clattering against the sky.

Four distant smokestacks stood like flagpoles, with coils of smoke weavingslowly about them, like long banners at half-mast in the reddish glow of theevening.

Mr. Mowen had lived with every smokestack of that skyline since the daysof his father and grandfather. He had seen the conveyor belt from his officewindow for thirty years. That the Quinn Ball Bearing Company should vanishfrom across the street had seemed inconceivable; he had known about Quinn'sdecision and had not believed it; or rather, he had believed it as hebelieved any words he heard or spoke: as sounds that bore no fixed relationto physical reality. Now he knew that it was real. He stood by the flatcarson the siding as if he still had a chance to stop them.

"It isn't right," he said; he was speaking to the skyline at large, butthe young man above was the only part of it that could hear him.

"That's not the way it was in my father's time. I'm not a big shot. Idon't want to fight anybody. What's the matter with the world?" There was noanswer, "Now you, for instance—are they taking you along to Colorado?"

"Me? No. I don't work here. I'm just transient labor. Just picked up thisjob helping to lug the stuff out."

"Well, where are you going to go when they move away?"

"Haven't any idea."

"What are you going to do, if more of them move out?""Wait and see."

Mr. Mowen glanced up dubiously: he could not tell whether the answer wasintended to apply to him or to the young man. But the young man's attentionwas fixed on his task; he was not looking down.

He moved on, to the shrouded shapes on the next flatcar, and Mr.

Mowen followed, looking up at him, pleading with something up in space:"I've got rights, haven't I? I was born here. I expected the old companies tobe here when I grew up. I expected to run the plant like my father did. A manis part of his community, he's got a right to count on it, hasn't he? . . .Something ought to be done about it."

"About what?"

"Oh, I know, you think it's great, don't you?—that Taggart boom andRearden Metal and the gold rush to Colorado and the drunken spree out there,with Wyatt and his bunch expanding their production like kettles boilingover! Everybody thinks it's great—that's all you hear anywhere you go—peopleare slap-happy, making plans like six-year olds on a vacation—you'd think itwas a national honeymoon of some kind or a permanent Fourth of July!"

The young man said nothing.

"Well, I don't think so," said Mr. Mowen. He lowered his voice. 'Thenewspapers don't say so, either—mind you that—the newspapers aren't sayinganything."

Mr. Mowen heard no answer, only the clanking of the chains.

"Why are they all running to Colorado?" he asked. "What have they got downthere that we haven't got?"

The young man grinned. "Maybe it's something you've got that they haven'tgot. "

"What?" The young man did not answer. "I don't see it. It's a backward,primitive, unenlightened place. They don't even have a modern government.It's the worst government in any state. The laziest. It does nothing—outsideof keeping law courts and a police department.

It doesn't do anything for the people. It doesn't help anybody. I don'tsee why all our best companies want to run there."

The young man glanced down at him, but did not answer.

Mr. Mowen sighed. "Things aren't right," he said. "The Equalization ofOpportunity Bill was a sound idea. There's got to be a chance for everybody.It's a rotten shame if people like Quinn take unfair

advantage of it. Why didn't he let somebody else start manufacturing ballbearings in Colorado? ... I wish the Colorado people would leave us alone.That Stockton Foundry out there had no right going into the switch and signalbusiness. That's been my business for years, I have the right of seniority,it isn't fair, it's dog-eat-dog competition, newcomers shouldn't be allowedto muscle in. Where am I going to sell switches and signals? There were twobig railroads out in Colorado.

Now the Phoenix-Durango's gone, so there's just Taggart Transcontinentalleft. It isn't fair—their forcing Dan Conway out. There's got to be room forcompetition. . . . And I've been waiting six months for an order of steelfrom Orren Boyle—and now he says he can't promise me anything, becauseRearden Metal has shot his market to hell, there's a run on that Metal, Boylehas to retrench. It isn't fair—Rearden being allowed to ruin other people'smarkets that way. . . . And I want to get some Rearden Metal, too, I need it—but try and get it! He has a waiting line that would stretch across threestates—nobody can get a scrap of it, except his old friends, people likeWyatt and Danagger and such. It isn't fair. It's discrimination. I'm just asgood as the next fellow. I'm entitled to my share of that Metal."

The young man looked up. "I was in Pennsylvania last week," he said. "Isaw the Rearden mills. There's a place that's busy! They're building four newopen-hearth furnaces, and they've got six more coming. . . . New furnaces,"he said, looking off to the south. "Nobody's built a new furnace on theAtlantic coast for the last five years. . . ."He stood against the sky, onthe top of a shrouded motor, looking off at the dusk with a faint smile ofeagerness and longing, as one looks at the distant vision of one's love."They're busy. . . ."he said.

Then his smile vanished abruptly; the way he jerked the cru-fin was thefirst break in the smooth competence of his movements: it looked like a joltof anger.

Mr. Mowen looked at the skyline, at the belts, the wheels, the smoke—thesmoke that settled heavily, peacefully across the evening air, stretching ina long haze all the way to the city of New York somewhere beyond the sunset—and he felt reassured by the thought of New York in its ring of sacred fires,the ring of smokestacks, gas tanks, cranes and high tension lines. He felt acurrent of power flowing through every grimy structure of his familiarstreet; he liked the figure of the young man above him, there was somethingreassuring in the way he worked, something that blended with the skyline. . .. Yet Mr. Mowen wondered why he felt that a crack was growing somewhere,eating through the solid, the eternal walls.

"Something ought to be done," said Mr. Mowen. "A friend of mine went outof business last week—the oil business—had a couple of wells down inOklahoma—couldn't compete with Ellis Wyatt. It isn't fair. They ought toleave the little people a chance. They ought to place a limit on Wyatt'soutput. He shouldn't be allowed to produce so much that he'll swamp everybodyelse off the market. ... I got stuck in New York yesterday, had to leave mycar there and come home on a damn commuters'1 local, couldn't get any gas for

the car, they said there's a shortage of oil in the city. . . . Things aren'tright. Something ought to be done about it. . . ."

Looking at the skyline, Mr. Mowen wondered what was the nameless threat toit and who was its destroyer.

"What do you want to do about it?" asked the young man.

"Who, me?" said Mr. Mowen. "I wouldn't know. I'm not a big shot.

I can't solve national problems. I just want to make a living. All I knowis, somebody ought to do something about it. . . . Things aren't right. . . .Listen—what's your name?"

"Owen Kellogg."

"Listen, Kellogg, what do you think is going to happen to the world?""You wouldn't care to know."

A whistle blew on a distant tower, the night-shift whistle, and Mr.Mowen realized that it was getting late. He sighed, buttoning his coat,turning to go.

"Well, things are being done," he said. "Steps are being taken.Constructive steps. The Legislature has passed a Bill giving wider powers tothe Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources. They've appointed avery able man as Top Co-ordinator. Can't say I've heard of him before, butthe newspapers said he's a man to be watched. His name is Wesley Mouch."

Dagny stood at the window of her living room, looking at the city.

It was late and the lights were like the last sparks left glittering onthe black remnants of a bonfire.

She felt at peace, and she wished she could hold her mind still to let herown emotions catch up with her, to look at every moment of the month that hadrushed past her. She had had no time to feel that she was back in her ownoffice at Taggart Transcontinental; there had been so much to do that sheforgot it was a return from exile. She had not noticed what Jim had said onher return or whether he had said anything. There had been only one personwhose reaction she had wanted to know; she had telephoned the Wayne-FalklandHotel; but Senor Francisco d'Anconia, she was told, had gone back to BuenosAires.

She remembered the moment when she signed her name at the bottom of a longlegal page; it was the moment that ended the John Gait Line. Now it was theRio Norte Line of Taggart Transcontinental again—except that the men of thetrain crews refused to give up its name. She, too, found it hard to give up;she forced herself not to call it "the John Gait, " and wondered why thatrequired an effort, and why she felt a faint wrench of sadness.

One evening, on a sudden impulse, she had turned the corner of the TaggartBuilding, for a last look at the office of John Gait, Inc., in the alley; shedid not know what she wanted—just to see it, she thought.

A plank barrier had been raised along the sidewalk: the old building wasbeing demolished; it had given up, at last. She had climbed over the planksand, by the light of the street lamp that had once thrown a stranger's shadowacross the pavement, she had looked in through the window of her formeroffice. Nothing was left of the ground floor; the partitions had been torndown, there were broken pipes hanging from the ceiling and a pile of rubbleon the floor. There was nothing to see.

She had asked Rearden whether he had come there one night last spring andstood outside her window, fighting his desire to enter. But she had known,even before he answered, that he had not. She did not tell him why she askedit. She did not know why that memory still disturbed her at times.

Beyond the window of her living room, the lighted rectangle of thecalendar hung like a small shipping tag in the black sky. It read: September2. She smiled defiantly, remembering the race she had run against itschanging pages; there were no deadlines now, she thought, no barriers, nothreats, no limits.

She heard a key turning in the door of her apartment; this was the soundshe had waited for, had wanted to hear tonight.

Rearden came in, as he had come many times, using the key she had givenhim, as sole announcement. He threw his hat and coat down on a chair with agesture that had become familiar; he wore the formal black of dinner clothes.

"Hello," she said.

"I'm still waiting for the evening when I won't find you in," he answered,"Then you'll have to phone the offices of Taggart Transcontinental.""Any evening? Nowhere else?""Jealous, Hank?"

"No. Curious what it would feel like, to be."

He stood looking at her across the room, refusing to let himself approachher, deliberately prolonging the pleasure of knowing that he could do itwhenever he wished. She wore the tight gray skirt of an office suit and ablouse of transparent white cloth tailored like a man's shirt; the blouseflared out above her waistline, stressing the trim flatness of her hips;against the glow of a lamp behind her, he could see the slender silhouette ofher body within the flaring circle of the blouse.

"How was the banquet?" she asked.

"Fine. I escaped as soon as I could. Why didn't you come? You wereinvited."

"I didn't want to see you in public."

He glanced at her, as if stressing that he noted the full meaning of heranswer; then the lines of his face moved to the hint of an amused smile. "Youmissed a lot. The National Council of Metal Industries won't put itself againthrough the ordeal of having me for guest of honor.

Not if they can help it."

"What happened?"

"Nothing. Just a lot of speeches.""Was it an ordeal for you?"

"No . . . Yes, in a way ... I had really wanted to enjoy it.""Shall I get you a drink?""Yes, will you?"

She turned to go. He stopped her, grasping her shoulders from behind; hebent her head back and kissed her mouth. When he raised his head, she pulledit down again with a demanding gesture of ownership, as if stressing herright to do it. Then she stepped away from him.

"Never mind the drink," he said, "I didn't really want it—except forseeing you wait on me."

"Well, then, let me wait on you."

"No. "

He smiled, stretching himself out on the couch, his hands crossed underhis head. He felt at home; it was the first home he had ever found.

"You know, the worst part of the banquet was that the only wish of everyperson present was to get it over with," he said. "What I can't understand iswhy they wanted to do it at all. They didn't have to. Certainly not for mysake."

She picked up a cigarette box, extended it to him, then held the flame ofa lighter to the tip of his cigarette, in the deliberate manner of waiting onhim. She smiled in answer to his chuckle, then sat down on the arm of a chairacross the room.

"Why did you accept their invitation, Hank?" she asked. "You've alwaysrefused to join them."

"I didn't want to refuse a peace offer—when I've beaten them and they knowit. I'll never join them, but an invitation to appear as a guest of honor-well, I thought they were good losers. I thought it was generous of them."

"Of them?"

"Are you going to say: of me?"

"Hank! After all the things they've done to stop you—"

"I won, didn't I? So I thought . . . You know, I didn't hold it againstthem that they couldn't see the value of the Metal sooner—so long as they sawit at last. Every man learns in his own way and time.

Sure, I knew there was a lot of cowardice there, and envy and hypocrisy,but I thought that that was only the surface—now, when I've proved my case,when I've proved it so loudly!—I thought their real motive for inviting mewas their appreciation of the Metal, and—"

She smiled in the brief space of his pause; she knew the sentence he hadstopped himself from uttering: " and for that, I would forgive anyoneanything. "

"But it wasn't," he said. "And I couldn't figure out what their motivewas. Dagny, I don't think they had any motive at all. They didn't give thatbanquet to please me, or to gain something from me, or to save face with thepublic. There was no purpose of any kind about it, no meaning. They didn'treally care when they denounced the Metal—and they don't care now. They'renot really afraid that I'll drive them all off the market—they don't careenough even about that. Do you know what that banquet was like? It's as ifthey'd heard that there are values one is supposed to honor and this is whatone does to honor them—so they went through the motions, like ghosts pulledby some sort of distant echoes from a better age. I ... I couldn't standit. "

She said, her face tight, "And you don't think you're generous!"He glanced up at her; his eyes brightened to a look of amusement."Why do they make you so angry?"

She said, her voice low to hide the sound of tenderness, "You wanted toenjoy it . . ."

"It probably serves me right. I shouldn't have expected anything. 1don't know what it was that I wanted.""I do."

"I've never liked occasions of that sort. I don't see why I expected it tobe different, this time. . . . You know, I went there feeling almost as ifthe Metal had changed everything, even people."

"Oh yes, Hank, I know!"

"Well, it was the wrong place to seek anything. ... Do you remember? Yousaid once that celebrations should be only for those who have something tocelebrate."

The dot of her lighted cigarette stopped in mid-air; she sat still. Shehad never spoken to him of that party or of anything related to his home. Ina moment., she answered quietly, "I remember."

"1 know what you meant ... I knew it then, too."

He was looking straight at her. She lowered her eyes.

He remained silent; when he spoke again, his voice was gay. "The worstthing about people is not the insults they hand out, but the compliments. Icouldn't bear the kind they spouted tonight, particularly when they keptsaying how much everybody needs me—they, the city, the country and the wholeworld, I guess. Apparently, their idea of the height of glory is to deal withpeople who need them. I can't stand people who need me." He glanced at her."Do you need me?"

She answered, her voice earnest, "Desperately."

He laughed. "No. Not the way I meant. You didn't say it the way they do.""How did I say it?"

"Like a trader—who pays for what he wants. They say it like beggars whouse a tin cup as a claim check.""I . . . pay for it, Hank?"

"Don't look innocent. You know exactly what I mean."

"Yes," she whispered; she was smiling.

"Oh, to hell with them!" he said happily, stretching his legs, shiftingthe position of his body on the couch, stressing the luxury of relaxation."I'm no good as a public figure. Anyway, it doesn't matter now.

We don't have to care what they see or don't see. They'll leave us alone.It's clear track ahead. What's the next undertaking, Mr. Vice-President?"

"A transcontinental track of Rearden Metal."

"How soon do you want it?"

"Tomorrow morning. Three years from now is when I'll get it.""Think you can do it in three years?"

"If the John Gait ... if the Rio Norte Line does as well as it's doingnow. "

"It's going to do better. That's only the beginning."

"I have an installment plan made out. As the money comes in, I'm going tostart tearing up the main track, one division at a time, and replacing itwith Rearden Metal rail."

"Okay. Any time you wish to start."

"I'll keep moving the old rail to the branch lines—they won't last muchlonger, if I don't. In three years, you'll ride on your own Metal into SanFrancisco, if somebody wants to give you a banquet there."

"In three years, I'll have mills pouring Rearden Metal in Colorado, inMichigan and in Idaho. That's my installment plan."

"Your own mills? Branches?"

"Uh-huh."

"What about the Equalization of Opportunity Bill?"

"You don't think it's going to exist three years from now, do you?

We've given them such a demonstration that all that rot is going to beswept away. The whole country is with us. Who'll want to stop things now?Who'll listen to the bilge? There's a lobby of the better kind of men workingIn Washington right this moment. They're going to get the Equalization Billscrapped at the next session."

"I . . .1 hope so."

"I've had a terrible time, these last few weeks, getting the new furnacesstarted, but it's all set now, they're being built, I can sit back and takeit easy. I can sit at my desk, rake in the money, loaf like a bum, watch theorders for the Metal pouring in and play favorites ail over the place. . . .Say, what's the first train you've got for Philadelphia tomorrow morning?"

"Oh, I don't know."

"You don't? What's the use of an Operating Vice-president? I have to be atthe mills by seven tomorrow. Got anything running around six?""Five-thirty A.M. is the first one, I think."

"Will you wake me up in time to make it or would you rather order thetrain held for me?""I'll wake you up.""Ok" .

She sat, watching him as he remained silent. He had looked tired when hecame in; the lines of exhaustion were gone from his face now.

"Dagny," he asked suddenly; his tone had changed, there was some hidden,earnest note in his voice, "why didn't you want to see me in public?"

"I don't want to be part of your . . . official life."

He did not answer; in a moment, he asked casually, "When did you take avacation last?"

"I think it was two . . . no, three years ago.""What did you do?"

"Went to the Adirondacks for a month. Came back in a week.""I did that five years ago. Only it was Oregon." He lay flat on his back,looking at the ceiling. "Dagny, let's take a vacation together. Let's take my

car and drive away for a few weeks, anywhere, just drive, down the backroads, where no one knows us. We'll leave no address, we won't look at anewspaper, we won't touch a phone—we won't have any official life at all."

She got up. She approached him, she stood by the side of the couch,looking down at him, the light of the lamp behind her; she did not want himto see her face and the effort she was making not to smile.

"You can take a few weeks off. can't you?" he said. "Things are set andgoing now. It's safe. We won't have another chance in the next three years."

"All right, Hank," she said, forcing her voice to sound calmly toneless.

"Will you?"

"When do you want to start?""Monday morning.""All right."

She turned to step away. He seized her wrist, pulled her down, swung herbody to lie stretched full-length on top of him, he held her still,uncomfortably, as she had fallen, his one hand in her hair, pressing hermouth to his, his other hand moving from the shoulder blades under her thinblouse to her waist, to her legs. She whispered, "And you say I don't needyou . . . !"

She pulled herself away from him, and stood up, brushing her hair off herface. He lay still, looking up at her, his eyes narrowed, the bright flickerof some particular interest in his eyes, intent and faintly mocking. Sheglanced down: a strap of her slip had broken, the slip hung diagonally fromher one shoulder to her side, and he was looking at her breast under thetransparent film of the blouse. She raised her hand to adjust the strap. Heslapped her hand down. She smiled, in understanding, in answering mockery.She walked slowly, deliberately across the room and leaned against a table,facing him, her hands holding the table's edge, her shoulders thrown back. Itwas the contrast he liked—the severity of her clothes and the half-nakedbody, the railroad executive who was a woman he owned.

He sat up; he sat leaning comfortably across the couch, his legs crossedand stretched forward, his hands in his pockets, looking at her with theglance of a property appraisal.

"Did you say you wanted a transcontinental track of Rearden Metal, Mr.Vice-President?" he asked. "What if I don't give it to you? I can choose mycustomers now and demand any price I please. If this were a year ago, I wouldhave demanded that you sleep with me in exchange."

"I wish you had."

"Would you have done it?"

"Of course."

"As a matter of business? As a sale?"

"If you were the buyer. You would have liked that, wouldn't you?""Would you?"

"Yes . . ." she whispered.

He approached her, he grasped her shoulders and pressed his mouth to herbreast through the thin cloth.

Then, holding her, he looked at her silently for a long moment."What did you do with that bracelet?" he asked.

They had never referred to it; she had to let a moment pass to regain thesteadiness of her voice. "I have it," she answered."I want you to wear it."

"If anyone guesses, it will be worse for you than for me.""Wear it."

She brought out the bracelet of Rearden Metal. She extended it to himwithout a word, looking straight at him, the green-blue chain glitteringacross her palm. Holding her glance, he clasped the bracelet on her wrist. In

the moment when the clasp clicked shut under his fingers, she bent her headdown to them and kissed his hand.

The earth went flowing under the hood of the car. Uncoiling from among thecurves of Wisconsin's hills, the highway was the only evidence of humanlabor, a precarious bridge stretched across a sea of brush, weeds and trees.The sea rolled softly, in sprays of yellow and orange, with a few red jetsshooting up on the hillsides, with pools of remnant green in the hollows,under a pure blue sky. Among the colors of a picture post card, the car'shood looked like the work of a jeweler, with the sun sparkling on itschromium steel, and its black enamel reflecting the sky.

Dagny leaned against the corner of the side window, her legs stretchedforward; she liked the wide, comfortable space of the car's seat and thewarmth of the sun on her shoulders; she thought that the countryside wasbeautiful.

"What I'd like to see," said Rearden, "is a billboard,"

She laughed: he had answered her silent thought. "Selling what and towhom? We haven't seen a car or a house for an hour."

"That's what I don't like about it." He bent forward a little, his handson the wheel; he was frowning. "Look at that road."

The long strip of concrete was bleached to the powdery gray of bones lefton a desert, as if sun and snows had eaten away the traces of tires, oil andcarbon, the lustrous polish of motion. Green weeds rose from the angularcracks of the concrete. No one had used the road or repaired it for manyyears; but the cracks were few.

"It's a good road," said Rearden. "It was built to last. The man who builtit must have had a good reason for expecting it to carry a heavy traffic inthe years ahead."

"Yes ..."

"I don't like the looks of this."

"I don't either." Then she smiled. "But think how often we've heard peoplecomplain that billboards ruin the appearance of the countryside.

Well, there's the unruined countryside for them to admire." She added,"They're the people I hate."

She did not want to feel the uneasiness which she felt like a thin crackunder her enjoyment of this day. She had felt that uneasiness at times, inthe last three weeks, at the sight of the country streaming past the wedge ofthe car's hood. She smiled: it was the hood that had been the immovable pointin her field of vision, while the earth had gone by, it was the hood that hadbeen the center, the focus, the security in a blurred, dissolving world . . .the hood before her and Rearden's hands on the wheel by her side . . . shesmiled, thinking that she was satisfied to let this be the shape of herworld.

After the first week of their wandering, when they had driven at random,at the mercy of unknown crossroads, he had said to her one morning as theystarted out, "Dagny, does resting have to be purposeless?" She had laughed,answering, "No. What factory do you want to see?" He had smiled—at the guilthe did not have to assume, at the explanations he did not have to give—and hehad answered, "It's an abandoned ore mine around Saginaw Bay, that I've heardabout. They say it's exhausted."

They had driven across Michigan to the ore mine. They had walked throughthe ledges of an empty pit, with the remnants of a crane like a skeletonbending above them against the sky, and someone's rusted lunchbox clatteringaway from under their feet. She had felt a stab of uneasiness, sharper thansadness—but Rearden had said cheerfully, "Exhausted, hell! I'll show them howmany tons and dollars I can draw out of this place!" On their way back to thecar, he had said, "If I could find the right man, I'd buy that mine for himtomorrow morning and set him up to work it."

The next day, when they were driving west and south, toward the plains ofIllinois, he had said suddenly, after a long silence, "No, I'll have to waittill they junk the Bill. The man who could work that mine, wouldn't need meto teach him. The man who'd need me, wouldn't be worth a damn."

They could speak of their work, as they always had, with full confidencein being understood. But they never spoke of each other. He acted as if theirpassionate intimacy were a nameless physical fact, not to be identified inthe communication between two minds. Each night, it was as if she lay in thearms of a stranger who let her see every shudder of sensation that ranthrough his body, but would never permit her to know whether the shocksreached any answering tremor within him. She lay naked at his side, but onher wrist there was the bracelet of Rearden Metal.

She knew that he hated the ordeal of signing the "Mr. and Mrs.

Smith" on the registers of squalid roadside hotels. There were eveningswhen she noticed the faint contraction of anger in the tightness of hismouth, as he signed the expected names of the expected fraud, anger at thosewho made fraud necessary. She noticed, indifferently, the air of knowingslyness in the manner of the hotel clerks, which seemed to suggest thatguests and clerks alike were accomplices in a shameful guilt: the guilt ofseeking pleasure. But she knew that it did not matter to him when they werealone, when he held her against him for a moment and she saw his eyes lookalive and guiltless.

They drove through small towns, through obscure side roads, through thekind of places they had not seen for years. She felt uneasiness at the sightof the towns. Days passed before she realized what it was that she missedmost: a glimpse of fresh paint. The houses stood like men in unpressed suits,who had lost the desire to stand straight: the cornices were like saggingshoulders, the crooked porch steps like torn hem lines, the broken windowslike patches, mended with clapboard. The people in the streets stared at thenew car, not as one stares at a rare sight, but as if the glittering blackshape were an impossible vision from another world. There were few vehiclesin the streets and too many of them were horse-drawn. She had forgotten theliteral shape and usage of horsepower; she did not like to see its return.

She did not laugh, that day at the grade crossing, when Rearden chuckled,pointing, and she saw the train of a small local railroad come tottering frombehind a hill, drawn by an ancient locomotive that coughed black smokethrough a tall stack.

"Oh God, Hank, it's not funny!"

"I know," he said.

They were seventy miles and an hour away from it, when she said, "Hank, doyou see the Taggart Comet being pulled across the continent by a coal-burnerof that kind?"

"What's the matter with you? Pull yourself together."

"I'm sorry . . . It's just that I keep thinking it won't be any use, allmy new track and all your new furnaces, if we don't find someone able toproduce Diesel engines. If we don't find him fast,"

"Ted Nielsen of Colorado is your man."

"Yes, if he finds a way to open his new plant. He's sunk more money thanhe should into the bonds of the John Gait Line."

"That's turned out to be a pretty profitable investment, hasn't it?"

"Yes, but it's held him up. Now he's ready to go ahead, but he can't findthe tools. There are no machine tools to buy, not anywhere, not at any price.He's getting nothing but promises and delays. He's combing the country,looking for old junk to reclaim, from closed factories. If he doesn't startsoon—"

"He will. Who's going to stop him now?"

"Hank," she said suddenly, "could we go to a place I'd like to see?"

"Sure, Anywhere. Which place?"

"It's in Wisconsin. There used to be a great motor company there, in myfather's time. We had a branch line serving it, but we closed the line—aboutseven years ago—when they closed the factory. I think it's one of thoseblighted areas now. Maybe there's still some machinery left there that TedNielsen could use. It might have been overlooked—the place is forgotten andthere's no transportation to it at all."

"I'll find it. What was the name of the factory?"

"The Twentieth Century Motor Company."

"Oh, of course! That was one of the best motor firms in my youth, perhapsthe best. I seem to remember that there was something odd about the way itwent out of business . . . can't recall what it was.'1

It took them three days of inquiries, but they found the bleached,abandoned road—and now they were driving through the yellow leaves thatglittered like a sea of gold coins, to the Twentieth Century Motor Company.

"Hank, what if anything happens to Ted Nielsen?" she asked suddenly, asthey drove in silence.

"Why should anything happen to him?"

"I don't know, but . . . well, there was Dwight Sanders. He vanished.United Locomotives is done for now. And the other plants are in no conditionto produce Diesels. I've stopped listening to promises. And . . . and of whatuse is a railroad without motive power?"

"Of what use is anything, for that matter, without it?"

The leaves sparkled, swaying in the wind. They spread for miles, fromgrass to brush to trees, with the motion and all the colors of fire; theyseemed to celebrate an accomplished purpose, burning in unchecked, untouchedabundance.

Rearden smiled. "There's something to be said for the wilderness.

I'm beginning to like it. New country that nobody's discovered." Shenodded gaily. "It's good soil—look at the way things grow. I'd clear thatbrush and I'd build a—"

And then they stopped smiling. The corpse they saw in the weeds by theroadside was a rusty cylinder with bits of glass—the remnant of a gas-stationpump.

It was the only thing left visible. The few charred posts, the slab ofconcrete and the sparkle of glass dust—which had been a gas station-were swallowed in the brush, not to be noticed except by a careful glance,not to be seen at all in another year.

They looked away. They drove on, not wanting to know what else lay hiddenunder the miles of weeds. They felt the same wonder like a weight in thesilence between them: wonder as to how much the weeds had swallowed and howfast.

The road ended abruptly behind the turn of a hill. What remained was a fewchunks of concrete sticking out of a long, pitted stretch of tar and mud. Theconcrete had been smashed by someone and carted away; even weeds could notgrow in the strip of earth left behind. On the crest of a distant hill, asingle telegraph pole stood slanted against the sky, like a cross over a vastgrave.

It took them three hours and a punctured tire to crawl in low gear throughtrackless soft, through gullies, then down ruts left by cart wheels—to reachthe settlement that lay in the valley beyond the hill with the telegraphpole.

A few houses still stood within the skeleton of what had once been anindustrial town. Everything that could move, had moved away; but some humanbeings had remained. The empty structures were vertical rubble; they had beeneaten, not by time, but by men: boards torn out at random, missing patches ofroofs, holes left in gutted cellars. It looked as if blind hands had seized

whatever fitted the need of the moment, with no concept of remaining inexistence the next morning.

The inhabited houses were scattered at random among the ruins; the smokeof their chimneys was the only movement visible in town. A shell of concrete,which had been a schoolhouse, stood on the outskirts; it looked like a skull,with the empty sockets of glassless windows, with a few strands of hair stillclinging to it, in the shape of broken wires.

Beyond the town, on a distant hill, stood the factory of the TwentiethCentury Motor Company. Its walls, roof lines and smokestacks looked trim,impregnable like a fortress. It would have seemed intact but for a silverwater tank: the water tank was tipped sidewise.

They saw no trace of a road to the factory in the tangled miles of treesand hillsides. They drove to the door of the first house in sight that showeda feeble signal of rising smoke. The door was open. An old woman cameshuffling out at the sound of the motor. She was bent and swollen,barefooted, dressed in a garment of flour sacking. She looked at the carwithout astonishment, without curiosity; it was the blank stare of a beingwho had lost the capacity to feel anything but exhaustion.

"Can you tell me the way to the factory?" asked Rearden.

The woman did not answer at once; she looked as if she would be unable tospeak English. "What factory?" she asked.Rearden pointed. "That one.""It's closed."

"I know it's closed. But is there any way to get there?"

"I don't know."

"Is there any sort of road?"

"There's roads in the woods."

"Any for a car to drive through?"

"Maybe."

"Well, which would be the best road to take?""I don't know."

Through the open door, they could see the interior of her house.

There was a useless gas stove, its oven stuffed with rags, serving as achest of drawers. There was a stove built of stones in a corner, with a fewlogs burning under an old kettle, and long streaks of soot rising up thewall. A white object lay propped against the legs of a table: it was aporcelain washbowl, torn from the wall of some bathroom, filled with wiltedcabbages. A tallow candle stood in a bottle on the table. There was no paintleft on the floor; its boards were scrubbed to a soggy gray that looked likethe visual expression of the pain in the bones of the person who had bent andscrubbed and lost the battle against the grime now soaked into the grain ofthe boards.

A brood of ragged children had gathered at the door behind the woman,silently, one by one. They stared at the car, not with the bright curiosityof children, but with the tension of savages ready to vanish at the firstsign of danger.

"How many miles is it to the factory?" asked Rearden.

"Ten miles," said the woman, and added, "Maybe five."

"How far is the next town?"

"There ain't any next town."

"There are other towns somewhere. I mean, how far?""Yeah. Somewhere."

In the vacant space by the side of the house, they saw faded rags hangingon a clothesline, which was a piece of telegraph wire. Three chickens peckedamong the beds of a scraggly vegetable garden; a fourth sat roosting on a barwhich was a length of plumber's pipe. Two pigs waddled in a stretch of mud

and refuse; the stepping stones laid across the muck were pieces of thehighway's concrete.

They heard a screeching sound in the distance and saw a man drawing waterfrom a public well by means of a rope pulley. They watched him as he cameslowly down the street. He carried two buckets that seemed too heavy for histhin arms. One could not tell his age.

He approached and stopped, looking at the car. His eyes darted at thestrangers, then away, suspicious and furtive.

Rearden took out a ten-dollar bill and extended it to him, asking, "Wouldyou please tell us the way to the factory?"

The man stared at the money with sullen indifference, not moving, notlifting a hand for it, still clutching the two buckets. If one were ever tosee a man devoid of greed, thought Dagny, there he was.

"We don't need no money around here," he said.

"Don't you work for a living?"

"Yeah."

"Well, what do you use for money?"

The man put the buckets down, as if it had just occurred to him that hedid not have to stand straining under their weight. "We don't use no money,"he said. "We just trade things amongst us."

"How do you trade with people from other towns?"

"We don't go to no other towns."

"You don't seem to have it easy here."

"What's that to you?"

"Nothing. Just curiosity. Why do you people stay here?"

"My old man used to have a grocery store here. Only the factory closed.""Why didn't you move?""Where to?""Anywhere.""What for?"

Dagny was staring at the two buckets:handles; they had been oil cans.

"Listen," said Rearden, "can you tell us whether there'factory?"

"There's plenty of roads."

"Is there one that a car can take?"

"I guess so."

"Which one?"

The man weighed the problem earnestly for some moments,turn to the left by the schoolhouse," he said, "and go on til you come to thecrooked oak, there's a road up there that's fine when it don't rain for acouple of weeks."

"When did it rain last?"

"Yesterday."

"Is there another road?"

"Well, you could go through Hanson's pasture and across the woods and thenthere's a good, solid road there, all the way down to the creek.""Is there a bridge across the creek?""No. "

"What are the other roads?"

"Well, if it's a car road that you want, there's one the other side ofMiller's patch, it's paved, it's the best road for a car, you just turn tothe right by the schoolhouse and—"

"But that road doesn't go to the factory, does it?"

"No, not to the factory."

"All right," said Rearden. "Guess we'll find our own way."

they were square tins with ropes a road to the

"Well, now, if you

He had pressed the starter, when a rock came smashing into the windshield.The glass was shatterproof, but a sunburst of cracks spread across it. Theysaw a ragged little hoodlum vanishing behind a corner with a scream oflaughter, and they heard the shrill laughter of children answering him frombehind some windows or crevices.

Rearden suppressed a swear word. The man looked vapidly across the street,frowning a little. The old woman looked on, without reaction. She had stoodthere silently, watching, without interest or purpose, like a chemicalcompound on a photographic plate, absorbing visual shapes because they werethere to be absorbed, but unable ever to form any estimate of the objects ofher vision.

Dagny had been studying her for some minutes. The swollen shapelessness ofthe woman's body did not look like the product of age and neglect: it lookedas if she was pregnant. This seemed impossible, but glancing closer Dagny sawthat her dust-colored hair was not gray and that there were few wrinkles onher face; it was only the vacant eyes, the stooped shoulders, the shufflingmovements that gave her the stamp of senility.

Dagny leaned out and asked, "How old are you?"

The woman looked at her, not in resentment, but merely as one looks at apointless question. "Thirty-seven," she answered.

They had driven five former blocks away, when Dagny spoke.

"Hank, " she said in terror, "that woman is only two years older than I!"

"Yes."

"God, how did they ever come to such a state?"He shrugged. "Who is John Gait?"

The last thing they saw, as they left the town, was a billboard. A designwas still visible on its peeling strips, imprinted in the dead gray that hadonce been color. It advertised a washing machine.

In a distant field, beyond the town, they saw the figure of a man movingslowly, contorted by the ugliness of a physical effort beyond the proper useof a human body: he was pushing a plow by hand.

They reached the factory of the Twentieth Century Motor Company two milesand two hours later. They knew, as they climbed the hill, that their questwas useless. A rusted padlock hung on the door of the main entrance, but thehuge windows were shattered and the place was open to anyone, to thewoodchucks, the rabbits and the dried leaves that lay in drifts inside.

The factory had been gutted long ago. The great pieces of machinery hadbeen moved out by some civilized means—the neat holes of their bases stillremained in the concrete of the floor. The rest had gone to random looters.There was nothing left, except refuse which the neediest tramp had foundworthless, piles of twisted, rusted scraps, of boards, plaster and glasssplinters—and the steel stairways, built to last and lasting, rising in trimspirals to the roof.

They stopped in the great hall where a ray of light fell diagonally from agap in the ceiling, and the echoes of their steps rang around them, dying faraway in rows of empty rooms. A bird darted from among the steel rafters andwent in a hissing streak of wings out into the sky, "We'd better look throughit, just in case," said Dagny. "You take the shops and I'll take the annexes.Let's do it as fast as possible."

"I don't like to let you wander around alone. I don't know how safe theyare, any of those floors or stairways."

"Oh, nonsense! I can find my way around a factory—or in a wrecking crew.Let's get it over with. I want to get out of here."

When she walked through the silent yards—where steel bridges still hungoverhead, tracing lines of geometrical perfection across the sky —her onlywish was not to see any of it, but she forced herself to look.

It was like having to perform an autopsy on the body of one's love. Shemoved her glance as an automatic searchlight, her teeth clamped tighttogether. She walked rapidly—there was no necessity to pause anywhere.

It was in a room of what had been the laboratory that she stopped. It wasa coil of wire that made her stop. The coil protruded from a pile of junk.She had never seen that particular arrangement of wires, yet it seemedfamiliar, as if it touched the hint of some memory, faint and very distant.She reached for the coil, but could not move it: it seemed to be part of someobject buried in the pile.

The room looked as if it had been an experimental laboratory—if she wasright in judging the purpose of the torn remnants she saw on the walls: agreat many electrical outlets, bits of heavy cable, lead conduits, glasstubing, built-in cabinets without shelves or doors. There was a great deal ofglass, rubber, plastic and metal in the junk pile, and dark gray splinters ofslate that had been a blackboard. Scraps of paper rustled dryly all over thefloor. There were also remnants of things which had not been brought here bythe owner of that room: popcorn wrappers, a whiskey bottle, a confessionmagazine.

She attempted to extricate the coil from the scrap pile. It would notmove; it was part of some large object. She knelt and began to dig throughthe junk.

She had cut her hands, she was covered with dust by the time she stood upto look at the object she had cleared. It was the broken remnant of the modelof a motor. Most of its parts were missing, but enough was left to conveysome idea of its former shape and purpose.

She had never seen a motor of this kind or anything resembling it.

She could not understand the peculiar design of its parts or the functionsthey were intended to perform.

She examined the tarnished tubes and odd-shaped connections. She tried toguess their purpose, her mind going over every type of motor she knew andevery possible kind of work its parts could perform.

None fitted the model. It looked like an electric motor, but she could nottell what fuel it was intended to burn. It was not designed for steam, oroil, or anything she could name.

Her sudden gasp was not a sound, but a jolt that threw her at the junkpile. She was on her hands and knees, crawling over the wreckage, seizingevery piece of paper in sight, flinging it away, searching further. Her handswere shaking.

She found part of what she hoped had remained in existence. It was a thinsheaf of typewritten pages clamped together—the remnant of a manuscript. Itsbeginning and end were gone; the bits of paper left under the clamp showedthe thick number of pages it had once contained. The paper was yellowed anddry. The manuscript had been a description of the motor.

From the empty enclosure of the plant's powerhouse, Rearden heard hervoice screaming, "Hank!" It sounded like a scream of terror.

He ran in the direction of the voice. He found her standing in the middleof a room, her hands bleeding, her stockings torn, her suit smeared withdust, a bunch of papers clutched in her hand.

"Hank, what does this look like?" she asked, pointing at an odd piece ofwreckage at her feet; her voice had the intense, obsessed tone of a personstunned by a shock, cut off from reality. "What does it look like?"

"Are you hurt? What happened?"

"No! . . . Oh, never mind, don't look at me! I'm all right. Look at this.Do you know what that is?"

"What did you do to yourself?"

"I had to dig it out of there. I'm all right.""You're shaking."

"You will, too, in a moment. Hank! Look at it. Just look and tell me whatyou think it is."

He glanced down, then looked attentively—then he was sitting on the floor,studying the object intently. "It's a queer way to put a motor together," hesaid, frowning.

"Read this," she said, extending the pages.

He read, looked up and said, "Good God!"

She was sitting on the floor beside him, and for a moment they could saynothing else.

"It was the coil," she said. She felt as if her mind were racing, shecould not keep up with all the things which a sudden blast had opened to hervision, and her words came hurtling against one another. "It was the coilthat I noticed first—because I had seen drawings like it, not quite, butsomething like it, years ago, when I was in school—it was in an old book, itwas given up as impossible long, long ago—but I liked to read everything Icould find about railroad motors. That book said that there was a time whenmen were thinking of it—they worked on it, they spent years on experiments,but they couldn't solve it and they gave it up. It was forgotten forgenerations. I didn't think that any living scientist ever thought of it now.But someone did.

Someone has solved it, now, today! . . . Hank, do you understand?

Those men, long ago, tried to invent a motor that would draw staticelectricity from the atmosphere, convert it and create its own power as itwent along. They couldn't do it. They gave it up." She pointed at the brokenshape. "But there it is."

He nodded. He was not smiling. He sat looking at the remnant, intent onsome thought of his own; it did not seem to be a happy thought.

"Hank! Don't you understand what this means? It's the greatest revolutionin power motors since the internal-combustion engine-greater than that! It wipes everything out—and makes everything possible.To hell with Dwight Sanders and all of them! Who'll want to look at a Diesel?Who'll want to worry about oil, coal or refueling stations? Do you see what Isee? A brand-new locomotive half the size of a single Diesel unit, and withten times the power. A self-generator, working on a few drops of fuel, withno limits to its energy. The cleanest, swiftest, cheapest means of motionever devised. Do you see what this will do to our transportation systems andto the country—in about one year?"

There was no spark of excitement in his face. He said slowly, "Whodesigned it? Why was it left here?"

"We'll find out."

He weighed the pages in his hand reflectively. "Dagny," he asked, "if youdon't find the man who made it, will you be able to reconstruct that motorfrom what is left?"

She took a long moment, then the word fell with a sinking sound: "No."

"Nobody will. He had it all right. It worked—judging by what he writeshere. It is the greatest thing I've ever laid eyes on. It was. We can't makeit work again. To supply what's missing would take a mind as great as his."

"I'll find him—if I have to drop every other thing I'm doing."

"—and if he's still alive."

She heard the unstated guess in the tone of his voice. "Why do you say itlike that?"

"I don't think he is. If he were, would he leave an invention of this kindto rot on a junk pile? Would he abandon an achievement of this size? If hewere still alive, you would have had the locomotives with the self-generatorsyears ago. And you wouldn't have had to look for him, because the whole worldwould know his name by now."

"I don't think this model was made so very long ago."

He looked at the paper of the manuscript and at the rusty tarnish of themotor. "About ten years ago, I'd guess. Maybe a little longer."

"We've got to find him or somebody who knew him. This is more important—"

«—than anything owned or manufactured by anyone today. I don't think we'llfind him. And if we don't, nobody will be able to repeat his performance.Nobody will rebuild his motor. There's not enough of it left. It's only alead, an invaluable lead, but it would take the sort of mind that's born oncein a century, to complete it. Do you see our present-day motor designersattempting it?"

"No. "

"There's not a first-rate designer left. There hasn't been a new idea inmotors for years. That's one profession that seems to be dying—or dead."

"Hank, do you know what that motor would have meant, if built?"

He chuckled briefly. "I'd say: about ten years added to the life of everyperson in this country—if you consider how many things it would have madeeasier and cheaper to produce, how many hours of human labor it would havereleased for other work, and how much more anyone's work would have broughthim. Locomotives? What about automobiles and ships and airplanes with a motorof this kind? And tractors.

And power plants. All hooked to an unlimited supply of energy, with nofuel to pay for, except a few pennies' worth to keep the converter going.That motor could have set the whole country in motion and on fire. It wouldhave brought an electric light bulb into every hole, even into the homes ofthose people we saw down in the valley."

"It would have? It will. I'm going to find the man who made it."

"We'll try."

He rose abruptly, but stopped to glance down at the broken remnant andsaid, with a chuckle that was not gay, "There was the motor for the John GaitLine."

Then he spoke in the brusque manner of an executive. "First, we'll try tosee if we can find their personnel office here. We'll look for their records,if there's any left. We want the names of their research staff and theirengineers. I don't know who owns this place now, and I suspect that theowners will be hard to find, or they wouldn't have let it come to this. Thenwe'll go over every room in the laboratory.

Later, we'll get a few engineers to fly here and comb the rest of theplace."

They started out, but she stopped for a moment on the threshold.

"Hank, that motor was the most valuable thing inside this factory,"

she said, her voice low. "It was more valuable than the whole factory andeverything it ever contained. Yet it was passed up and left in the refuse. Itwas the one thing nobody found worth the trouble of taking."

"That's what frightens me about this," he answered.

The personnel office did not take them long. They found it by the signwhich was left on the door, but it was the only thing left. There was nofurniture inside, no papers, nothing but the splinters of smashed windows.

They went back to the room of the motor. Crawling on hands and knees, theyexamined every scrap of the junk that littered the floor.

There was little to find. They put aside the papers that seemed to containlaboratory notes, but none referred to the motor, and there were no pages ofthe manuscript among them. The popcorn wrappers and the whiskey bottletestified to the kind of invading hordes that had rolled through the room,like waves washing the remnants of destruction away to unknown bottoms.

They put aside a few bits of metal that could have belonged to the motor,but these were too small to be of value. The motor looked as if parts of ithad been ripped off, perhaps by someone who thought he could put them to somecustomary use. What had remained was too unfamiliar to interest anybody.

On aching knees, her palms spread flat upon the gritty floor, she felt theanger trembling within her, the hurting, helpless anger that answers thesight of desecration. She wondered whether someone's diapers hung on aclothesline made of the motor's missing wires—whether its wheels had become arope pulley over a communal well—whether its cylinder was now a potcontaining geraniums on the window sill of the sweetheart of the man with thewhiskey bottle.

There was a remnant of light on the hill, but a blue haze was moving inupon the valleys, and the red and gold of the leaves was spreading to the skyin strips of sunset.

It was dark when they finished. She rose and leaned against the emptyframe of the window for a touch of cool air on her forehead. The sky was darkblue. "It could have set the whole country in motion and on fire." She lookeddown at the motor. She looked out at the country. She moaned suddenly, hit bya single long shudder, and dropped her head on her arm, standing pressed tothe frame of the window.

"What's the matter?" he asked.

She did not answer.

He looked out. Far below, in the valley, in the gathering night, theretrembled a few pale smears which were the lights of tallow candles.

CHAPTER XWYATT'S TORCH

"God have mercy on us, ma'am!" said the clerk of the Hall of Records."Nobody knows who owns that factory now. I guess nobody will ever know it,"

The clerk sat at a desk in a ground-floor office, where dust layundisturbed on the files and few visitors ever called. He looked at theshining automobile parked outside his window, in the muddy square that hadonce been the center of a prosperous county seat; he looked with a faint,wistful wonder at his two unknown visitors.

"Why?" asked Dagny.

He pointed helplessly at the mass of papers he had taken out of the files."The court will have to decide who owns it, which I don't think any court cando. If a court ever gets to it. I don't think it will."

"Why? What happened?"

"Well, it was sold out—the Twentieth Century, I mean. The TwentiethCentury Motor Company. It was sold twice, at the same time and to twodifferent sets of owners. That was sort of a big scandal at the time, twoyears ago, and now it's just"—he pointed—"just a bunch of paper lying around,waiting for a court hearing. I don't see how any judge will be able tountangle any property rights out of it—or any right at all."

"Would you tell me please just what happened?"

"Well, the last legal owner of the factory was The People's MortgageCompany, of Rome, Wisconsin. That's the town the other side of the factory,thirty miles north. That Mortgage Company was a sort of noisy outfit that dida lot of advertising about easy credit. Mark Yonts was the head of it. Nobodyknew where he came from and nobody knows where he's gone to now, but whatthey discovered, the morning after The People's Mortgage Company collapsed,was that Mark Yonts had sold the Twentieth Century Motor factory to a bunchof suckers from South Dakota, and that he'd also given it as collateral for aloan from a bank in Illinois. And when they took a look at the factory, theydiscovered that he'd moved all the machinery out and sold it piecemeal, Godonly knows where and to whom. So it seems like everybody owns the place—andnobody. That's how it stands now—the South Dakotans and the bank and theattorney for the creditors of The People's Mortgage Company all suing oneanother, all claiming this factory, and nobody having the right to move awheel in it, except that there's no wheels left to move.""Did Mark Yonts operate the factory before he sold it?""Lord, no, ma'am! He wasn't the kind that ever operates anything.He didn't want to make money, only to get it. Guess he got it, too-more than anyone could have made out of that factory."

He wondered why the blond, hard-faced man, who sat with the woman in frontof his desk, looked grimly out the window at their car, at a large objectwrapped in canvas, roped tightly under the raised cover of the car's luggagecompartment.

"What happened to the factory records?"

"Which do you mean, ma'am?"

"Their production records. Their work records. Their . . . personnelfiles."

"Oh, there's nothing left of that now. There's been a lot of looting goingon. All the mixed owners grabbed what furniture or things they could haul outof there, even if the sheriff did put a padlock on the door. The papers andstuff like that—I guess it was all taken by the scavengers from Starnesville,that's the place down in the valley, where they're having it pretty toughthese days. They burned the stuff for kindling, most likely."

"Is there anyone left here who used to work in the factory?" askedRearden.

"No, sir. Not around here. They all lived down in Starnesville.""All of them?" whispered Dagny; she was thinking of the ruins. "The . . .engineers, too?"

"Yes, ma'am. That was the factory town. They've all gone, long ago.""Do you happen to remember the names of any men who worked there?""No, ma'am."

"What owner was the last to operate the factory?" asked Rearden.

"I couldn't say, sir. There's been so much trouble up there and the placehas changed hands so many times, since old Jed Starnes died.

He's the man who built the factory. He made this whole part of thecountry, I guess. He died twelve years ago."

"Can you give us the names of all the owners since?"

"No, sir. We had a fire in the old courthouse, about three years ago, andall the old records are gone. I don't know where you could trace them now."

"You don't know how this Mark Yonts happened to acquire the factory?"

"Yes, I know that. He bought it from Mayor Bascom of Rome. How MayorBascom happened to own it, I don't know."

"Where is Mayor Bascom now?"

"Still there, in Rome."

"Thank you very much," said Rearden, rising. "We'll call on him."They were at the door when the clerk asked, "What is it you're lookingfor, sir?"

"We're looking for a friend of ours," said Rearden. "A friend we've lost,who used to work in that factory."

Mayor Bascom of Rome, Wisconsin, leaned back in his chair; his chest andstomach formed a pear-shaped outline under his soiled shirt.

The air was a mixture of sun and dust, pressing heavily upon the porch ofhis house. He waved his arm, the ring on his finger flashing a large topaz ofpoor quality.

"No use, no use, lady, absolutely no use," he said. "Would be just a wasteof your time, trying to question the folks around here. There's no factorypeople left, and nobody that would remember much about them. So many familieshave moved away that what's left here is plain no good, if I do say somyself, plain no good, just being Mayor of a bunch of trash."

He had offered chairs to his two visitors, but he did not mind it if thelady preferred to stand at the porch railing. He leaned back, studying herlong-lined figure; high-class merchandise, he thought; but then, the man withher was obviously rich.

Dagny stood looking at the streets of Rome. There were houses, sidewalks,lampposts, even a sign advertising soft drinks; but they looked as if it werenow only a matter of inches and hours before the town would reach the stageof Starnesville.

"Naw, there's no factory records left," said Mayor Bascom. "If that's whatyou want to find, lady, give it up. It's like chasing leaves in a storm now.Just like leaves in a storm. Who cares about papers? At a time like this,what people save is good, solid, material objects. One's got to bepractical."

Through the dusty windowpanes, they could see the living room of hishouse: there were Persian rugs on a buckled wooden floor, a portable bar withchromium strips against a wall stained by the seepage of last year's rains,an expensive radio with an old kerosene lamp placed on top of it.

"Sure, it's me that sold the factory to Mark Yonts. Mark was a nicefellow, a nice, lively, energetic fellow. Sure, he did trim a few corners,but who doesn't? Of course, he went a bit too far. That, I didn't expect.

I thought he was smart enough to stay within the law—whatever's left of itnowadays."

Mayor Bascom smiled, looking at them in a manner of placid frankness. Hiseyes were shrewd without intelligence, his smile good-natured withoutkindness.

"I don't think you folks are detectives," he said, "but even if you were,it wouldn't matter to me. I didn't get any rake-off from Mark, he didn't letme in on any of his deals, I haven't any idea where he's gone to now." Hesighed. "I liked that fellow. Wish he'd stayed around. Never mind the Sundaysermons. He had to live, didn't he? He was no worse than anybody, onlysmarter. Some get caught at it and some don't—

that's the only difference. . . . Nope, I didn't know what he was going todo with it, when he bought that factory. Sure, he paid me quite a bit morethan the old booby trap was worth. Sure, he was doing me a favor when hebought it. Nope, I didn't put any pressure on him to make him buy it. Wasn'tnecessary. I'd done him a few favors before. There's plenty of laws that'ssort of made of rubber, and a mayor's in a position to stretch them a bit fora friend. Well, what the hell? That's the only way anybody ever gets rich inthis world"—he glanced at the luxurious black car—"as you ought to know."

"You were telling us about the factory," said Rearden, trying to controlhimself.

"What I can't stand," said Mayor Bascom, "is people who talk aboutprinciples. No principle ever filled anybody's milk bottle. The only thingthat counts in life is solid, material assets. It's no time for theories,when everything is falling to pieces around us. Well, me—I don't aim to gounder. Let them keep their ideas and I'll take the factory. I don't wantideas, I just want my three square meals a day."

"Why did you buy that factory?"

"Why does anybody buy any business? To squeeze whatever can be squeezedout of it. I know a good chance when I see it. It was a bankruptcy sale andnobody much who'd want to bid on the old mess. So I got the place forpeanuts. Didn't have to hold it long, either—Mark took it off my hands intwo-three months. Sure, it was a smart deal, if I say so myself. No bigbusiness tycoon could have done any better with it."

"Was the factory operating when you took it over?"

"Naw. It was shut down."

"Did you attempt to reopen it?"

"Not me. I'm a practical person."

"Can you recall the names of any men who worked there?""No. Never met 'em."

"Did you move anything out of the factory?"

"Well, I'll tell you. I took a look around—and what I liked was old Jed'sdesk. Old led Starnes. He was a real big shot in his time. Wonderful desk,solid mahogany. So I carted it home. And some executive, don't know who hewas, had a stall shower in his bathroom, the like of which I never saw. Aglass door with a mermaid cut in the glass, real art work, and hot stuff,too, hotter than any oil painting. So I had that shower lifted and movedhere. What the hell, I owned it, didn't I? I was entitled to get somethingvaluable out of that factory."

"Whose bankruptcy sale was it, when you bought the factory?"

"Oh, that was the big crash of the Community National Bank in Madison.Boy, was that a crash! It just about finished the whole state of Wisconsin-sure finished this part of it. Some say it was this motor factory that brokethe bank, but others say it was only the last drop in a leaking bucket,because the Community National had bum investments all over three or fourstates. Eugene Lawson was the head of it. The banker with a heart, theycalled him. He was quite famous in these parts two-three years ago."

"Did Lawson operate the factory?"

"No. He merely lent an awful lot of money on it, more than he could everhope to get back out of the old dump. When the factory busted, that was thelast straw for Gene Lawson. The bank busted three months later." He sighed."It hit the folks pretty hard around here. They all had their life savings inthe Community National."

Mayor Bascom looked regretfully past his porch railing at his town.

He jerked his thumb at a figure across the street: it was a white-hairedcharwoman, moving painfully on her knees, scrubbing the steps of a house.

"See that woman, for instance? They used to be solid, respectable folks.Her husband owned the dry-goods store. He worked all his life to provide forher in her old age, and he did, too, by the time he died—

only the money was in the Community National Bank."

"Who operated the factory when it failed?"

"Oh, that was some quicky corporation called Amalgamated Service, Inc.Just a puff-ball. Came up out of nothing and went back to it.""Where are its members?"

"Where are the pieces of a puff-ball when it bursts? Try and trace themall over the United States. Try it.""Where is Eugene Lawson?"

"Oh, him? He's done all right. He's got a job in Washington—in the Bureauof Economic Planning and National Resources."

Rearden rose too fast, thrown to his feet by a jolt of anger, then said,controlling himself, "Thank you for the information."

"You're welcome, friend, you're welcome," said Mayor Bascom placidly. "Idon't know what it is you're after, but take my word for it, give it up.There's nothing more to be had out of that factory."

"I told you that we are looking for a friend of ours."

"Well, have it your way. Must be a pretty good friend, if you'll go to somuch trouble to find him, you and the charming lady who is not your Wife."

Dagny saw Rearden's face go white, so that even his lips became asculptured feature, indistinguishable against his skin. "Keep your dirty —"

he began, but she stepped between them.

"Why do you think that I am not his wife?" she asked calmly.

Mayor Bascom looked astonished by Rearden's reaction; he had made theremark without malice, merely like a fellow cheat displaying his shrewdnessto his partners in guilt.

"Lady, I've seen a lot in my lifetime," he said good-naturedly. "Marriedpeople don't look as if they have a bedroom on their minds when they look ateach other. In this world, either you're virtuous or you enjoy yourself. Notboth, lady, not both."

"I've asked him a question," she said to Rearden in time to silence him."He's given me an instructive explanation."

"If you want a tip, lady," said Mayor Bascom, "get yourself a wedding ringfrom the dime store and wear it. It's not sure fire, but it helps."

"Thank you," she said, "Good-bye."

The stern, stressed calm of her manner was a command that made Reardenfollow her back to their car in silence.

They were miles beyond the town when he said, not looking at her, hisvoice desperate and low, "Dagny, Dagny, Dagny . . .I'm sorry!"

"I'm not."

Moments later, when she saw the look of control returning to his face, shesaid, "Don't ever get angry at a man for stating the truth.""That particular truth was none of his business."

"His particular estimate of it was none of your concern or mine."He said through his teeth, not as an answer, but as if the single thoughtbattering his brain turned into sounds against his will, 'T

couldn't protect you from that unspeakable little—"

"I didn't need protection."

He remained silent, not looking at her.

"Hank, when you're able to keep down the anger, tomorrow or next week,give some thought to that man's explanation and see if you recognize any partof it."

He jerked his head to glance at her, but said nothing.

When he spoke, a long time later, it was only to say in a tired, evenvoice, "We can't call New York and have our engineers come here to search thefactory. We can't meet them here. We can't let it be known that we found themotor together. ... I had forgotten all that . . .

up there ... in the laboratory."

"Let me call Eddie, when we find a telephone. I'll have him send twoengineers from the Taggart staff. I'm here alone, on my vacation, for allthey'll know or have to know."

They drove two hundred miles before they found a long-distance telephoneline. When she called Eddie Willers, he gasped, hearing her voice.

"Dagny! For God's sake, where are you?"

"In Wisconsin. Why?"

"1 didn't know where to reach you. You'd better come back at once.As fast as you can.""What happened?"

"Nothing—yet. But there are things going on, which . . . You'd better stopthem now, if you can. If anybody can.""What things?"

"Haven't you been reading the newspapers?""No. "

"I can't tell you over the phone. I can't give you all the details.Dagny, you'll think I'm insane, but I think they're planning to killColorado."

"I'll come back at once," she said.

Cut into the granite of Manhattan, under the Taggart Terminal, there weretunnels which had once been used as sidings, at a time when traffic ran inclicking currents through every artery of the Terminal every hour of the day.The need for space had shrunk through the years, with the shrinking of thetraffic, and the side tunnels had been abandoned, like dry river beds; a fewlights remained as blue patches on the granite over rails left to rust on theground.

Dagny placed the remnant of the motor into a vault in one of the tunnels;the vault had once contained an emergency electric generator, which had beenremoved long ago. She did not trust the useless young men of the Taggartresearch staff; there were only two engineers of talent among them, who couldappreciate her discovery. She had shared her secret with the two and sentthem to search the factory in Wisconsin. Then she had hidden the motor whereno one else would know of its existence.

When her workers carried the motor down to the vault and departed, she wasabout to follow them and lock the steel door, but she stopped, key in hand,as if the silence and solitude had suddenly thrown her at the problem she hadbeen facing for days, as if this were the moment to make her decision.

Her office car was waiting for her at one of the Terminal platforms,attached to the end of a train due to leave for Washington in a few minutes.She had made an appointment to see Eugene Lawson, but she had told herselfthat she would cancel it and postpone her quest—if she could think of someaction to take against the things she had found on her return to New York,the things Eddie begged her to fight.

She had tried to think, but she could see no way of fighting, no rules ofbattle, no weapons. Helplessness was a strange experience, new to her; she

had never found it hard to face things and make decisions; but she was notdealing with things—this was a fog without shapes or definitions, in whichsomething kept forming and shifting before it could be seen, like semi-clotsin a not-quite-liquid—it was as if her eyes were reduced to side-vision andshe were sensing blurs of disaster coiling toward her, but she could not moveher glance, she had no glance to move and focus.

The Union of Locomotive Engineers was demanding that the maximum speed ofall trains on the John Gait Line be reduced to sixty miles an hour. The Unionof Railway Conductors and Brakemen was demanding that the length of allfreight trains on the John Gait Line be reduced to sixty cars.

The states of Wyoming, New Mexico, Utah and Arizona were demanding thatthe number of trains run in Colorado not exceed the number of trains run ineach of these neighboring states.

A group headed by Orren Boyle was demanding the passage of a Preservationof Livelihood Law, which would limit the production of Rearden Metal to anamount equal to the output of any other steel mill of equal plant capacity, Agroup headed by Mr. Mowen was demanding the passage of a Fair Share Law togive every customer who wanted it an equal supply of Rearden Metal.

A group headed by Bertram Scudder was demanding the passage of a PublicStability Law, forbidding Eastern business firms to move out of their states.

Wesley Mouch, Top Co-ordinator of the Bureau of Economic Planning andNational Resources, was issuing a great many statements, the content andpurpose of which could not be denned, except that the words "emergencypowers" and "unbalanced economy" kept appearing in the text every few lines.

"Dagny, by what right?" Eddie Willers had asked her, his voice quiet, butthe words sounding like a cry. "By what right are they all doing it?

By what right?"

She had confronted James Taggart in his office and said, "Jim, this isyour battle. I've fought mine. You're supposed to be an expert at dealingwith the looters. Stop them."

Taggart had said, not looking at her, "You can't expect to run thenational economy to suit your own convenience."

"I don't want to run the national economy! I want your national economyrunners to leave me alone! I have a railroad to run—and I know what's goingto happen to your national economy if my railroad collapses!"

"I see no necessity for panic."

"Jim, do I have to explain to you that the income from our Rio Norte Lineis all we've got, to save us from collapsing? That we need every penny of it,every fare, every carload of freight—as fast as we can get it?" He had notanswered. "When we have to use every bit of power in every one of our broken-down Diesels, when we don't have enough of them to give Colorado the serviceit needs—what's going to happen if we reduce the speed and the length oftrains?"

"Well, there's something to be said for the unions' viewpoint, too.

With so many railroads closing and so many railroad men out of work, theyfeel that those extra speeds you've established on the Rio Norte Line areunfair—they feel that there should be more trains, instead, so that the workwould be divided around—they feel that it's not fair for us to get all thebenefit of that new rail, they want a share of it, too."

"Who wants a share of it? In payment for what?" He had not answered."Who'll bear the cost of two trains doing the work of one?" He had notanswered. "Where are you going to get the cars and the engines?" He had notanswered. "What are those men going to do after they've put TaggartTranscontinental out of existence?"

"I fully intend to protect the interests of Taggart Transcontinental."

"How?" He had not answered. "How—if you kill Colorado?"

"It seems to me that before we worry about giving some people a chance toexpand, we ought to give some consideration to the people who need a chanceof bare survival."

"If you kill Colorado, what is there going to be left for your damnlooters to survive on?"

"You have always been opposed to every progressive social measure. I seemto remember that you predicted disaster when we passed the Anti-dog-eat-dogRule—but the disaster has not come."

"Because I saved you, you rotten fools! I won't be able to save you thistime!" He had shrugged, not looking at her. "And if I don't, who will?" Hehad not answered.

It did not seem real to her, here, under the ground. Thinking of it here,she knew she could have no part in Jim's battle. There was no action shecould take against the men of undefined thought, of unnamed motives, ofunstated purposes, of unspecified morality. There was nothing she could sayto them—nothing would be heard or answered. What were the weapons, shethought, in a realm where reason was not a weapon any longer? It was a realmshe could not enter. She had to leave it to Jim and count on his self-interest. Dimly, she felt the chill of a thought telling her that self-interest was not Jim's motive.

She looked at the object before her, a glass case containing the remnantof the motor. The man who made the motor—she thought suddenly, the thoughtcoming like a cry of despair. She felt a moment's helpless longing to findhim, to lean against him and let him tell her what to do. A mind like hiswould know the way to win this battle.

She looked around her. In the clean, rational world of the undergroundtunnels, nothing was of so urgent an importance as the task of finding theman who made the motor. She thought: Could she delay it in order to arguewith Orren Boyle?—to reason with Mr. Mowen?—to plead with Bertram Scudder?She saw the motor, completed, built into an engine that pulled a train of twohundred cars down a track of Rearden Metal at two hundred miles an hour. Whenthe vision was within her reach, within the possible, was she to give it upand spend her time bargaining about sixty miles and sixty cars? She could notdescend to an existence where her brain would explode under the pressure offorcing itself not to outdistance incompetence. She could not function to therule of: Pipe down—keep down—slow down—don't do your best, it is not wanted!

She turned resolutely and left the vault, to take the train forWashington.

It seemed to her, as she locked the steel door, that she heard a faintecho of steps. She glanced up and down the dark curve of the tunnel.

There was no one in sight; there was nothing but a string of blue lightsglistening on walls of damp granite.

Rearden could not fight the gangs who demanded the laws. The choice was tofight them or to keep his mills open. He had lost his supply of iron ore. Hehad to fight one battle or the other. There was no time for both.

He had found, on his return, that a scheduled shipment of ore had not beendelivered. No word or explanation had been heard from Larkin. When summonedto Rearden's office, Larkin appeared three days later than the appointmentmade, offering no apology. He said, not looking at Rearden, his mouth drawntightly into an expression of rancorous dignity: "After all, you can't orderpeople to come running to your office any time you please."

Rearden spoke slowly and carefully. "Why wasn't the ore delivered?"

"I won't take abuse, I simply won't take any abuse for something Icouldn't help. I can run a mine just as well as you ran it, every bit aswell, I did everything you did—I don't know why something keeps going wrongunexpectedly all the time. I can't be blamed for the unexpected."

"To whom did you ship your ore last month?"

"I intended to ship you your share of it, I fully intended it, but Icouldn't help it if we lost ten days of production last month on account ofthe rainstorm in the whole of north Minnesota—I intended to ship you the ore,so you can't blame me, because my intention was completely honest."

"If one of my blast furnaces goes down, will I be able to keep it going byfeeding your intention into it?"

"That's why nobody can deal with you or talk to you—because you'reinhuman,"

"I have just learned that for the last three months, you have not beenshipping your ore by the lake boats, you have been shipping it by rail.Why?"

"Well, after all, I have a right to run my business as I see fit.""Why are you willing to pay the extra cost?""What do you care? I'm not charging it to you."

"What will you do when you find that you can't afford the rail rates andthat you have destroyed the lake shipping?"

"I am sure you wouldn't understand any consideration other than dollarsand cents, but some people do consider their social and patrioticresponsibilities."

"What responsibilities?"

"Well, I think that a railroad like Taggart Transcontinental is essentialto the national welfare and it is one's public duty to support Jim'sMinnesota branch line, which is running at a deficit."

Rearden leaned forward across the desk; he was beginning to see the linksof a sequence he had never understood. "To whom did you ship your ore lastmonth?" he asked evenly.

"Well, after all, that is my private business which—"

"To Orren Boyle, wasn't it?"

"You can't expect people to sacrifice the entire steel industry of thenation to your selfish interests and—"

"Get out of here," said Rearden. He said it calmly. The sequence was clearto him now.

"Don't misunderstand me, I didn't mean—"

"Get out."

Larkin got out.

Then there followed the days and nights of searching a continent by phone,by wire, by plane—of looking at abandoned mines and at mines ready to beabandoned—of tense, rushed conferences held at tables hi the unlightedcorners of disreputable restaurants. Looking across the table, Rearden had todecide how much he could risk to invest upon the sole evidence of a man'sface, manner and tone of voice, hating the state of having to hope forhonesty as for a favor, but risking it, pouring money into unknown hands inexchange for unsupported promises, into unsigned, unrecorded loans to dummyowners of failing mines-money handed and taken furtively, as an exchange between criminals, inanonymous cash; money poured into unenforceable contracts—both partiesknowing that in case of fraud, the defrauded was to be punished, not thedefrauder—but poured that a stream of ore might continue flowing intofurnaces, that the furnaces might continue to pour a stream of white metal.

"Mr. Rearden," asked the purchasing manager of his mills, "if you keepthat up, where will be your profit?"

"We'll make it up on tonnage," said Rearden wearily. "We have an unlimitedmarket for Rearden Metal."

The purchasing manager was an elderly man with graying hair, a lean, dryface, and a heart which, people said, was given exclusively to the task ofsqueezing every last ounce of value out of a penny. He stood in front ofRearden's desk, saying nothing else, merely looking straight at Rearden, his

cold eyes narrowed and grim. It was a look of the most profound sympathy thatRearden had ever seen.

There's no other course open, thought Rearden, as he had thought throughdays and nights. He knew no weapons but to pay for what he wanted, to givevalue for value, to ask nothing of nature without trading his effort inreturn, to ask nothing of men without trading the product of his effort. Whatwere the weapons, he thought, if values were not a weapon any longer?

"An unlimited market, Mr. Rearden?" the purchasing manager asked dryly.

Rearden glanced up at him. "I guess I'm not smart enough to make the sortof deals needed nowadays," he said, in answer to the unspoken thoughts thathung across his desk.

The purchasing manager shook his head. "No, Mr. Rearden, it's one or theother. The same kind of brain can't do both. Either you're good at runningthe mills or you're good at running to Washington."

"Maybe I ought to learn their method."

"You couldn't learn it and it wouldn't do you any good. You wouldn't winin any of those deals. Don't you understand? You're the one who's gotsomething to be looted."

When he was left alone, Rearden felt a jolt of blinding anger, as it hadcome to him before, painful, single and sudden like an electric shock—theanger bursting out of the knowledge that one cannot deal with pure evil, withthe naked, full-conscious evil that neither has nor seeks justification. Butwhen he felt the wish to fight and kill in the rightful cause of self-defense—he saw the fat, grinning face of Mayor Bascom and heard the drawlingvoice saying, ". . . you and the charming lady who is not your wife."

Then no rightful cause was left, and the pain of anger was turning intothe shameful pain of submission. He had no right to condemn anyone—hethought—to denounce anything, to fight and die joyously, claiming thesanction of virtue. The broken promises, the unconfessed desires, thebetrayal, the deceit, the lies, the fraud—he was guilty of them all. Whatform of corruption could he scorn? Degrees do not matter, he thought; onedoes not bargain about inches of evil.

He did not know—as he sat slumped at his desk, thinking of the honesty hecould claim no longer, of the sense of justice he had lost—

that it was his rigid honesty and ruthless sense of justice that were nowknocking his only weapon out of his hands. He would fight the looters, butthe wrath and fire were gone. He would fight, but only as one guilty wretchagainst the others. He did not pronounce the words, but the pain was theirequivalent, the ugly pain saying: Who am I to cast the first stone?

He let his body fall across the desk. . . . Dagny, he thought, Dagny, ifthis is the price I have to pay, I'll pay it. . . .He was still the traderwho knew no code except that of full payment for his desires.

It was late when he came home and hurried soundlessly up the stairs to hisbedroom. He hated himself for being reduced to sneaking, but he had done iton most of his evenings for months. The sight of his family had becomeunbearable to him; he could not tell why. Don't hate them for your own guilt,he had told himself, but knew dimly that this was not the root of his hatred.

He closed the door of his bedroom like a fugitive winning a moment'sreprieve. He moved cautiously, undressing for bed: he wanted no sound tobetray his presence to his family, he wanted no contact with them, not evenin their own minds.

He had put on his pajamas and stopped to light a cigarette, when the doorof his bedroom opened. The only person who could properly enter his roomwithout knocking had never volunteered to enter it, so he stared blankly fora moment before he was able to believe that it was Lillian who came in.

She wore an Empire garment of pale chartreuse, its pleated skirt streaminggracefully from its high waistline; one could not tell at first glancewhether it was an evening gown or a negligee; it was a negligee.

She paused in the doorway, the lines of her body flowing into anattractive silhouette against the light.

"I know I shouldn't introduce myself to a stranger," she said softly, "butI'll have to: my name is Mrs. Rearden." He could not tell whether it wassarcasm or a plea.

She entered and threw the door closed with a casual, imperious gesture,the gesture of an owner.

"What is it, Lillian?" he asked quietly.

"My dear, you mustn't confess so much so bluntly"—she moved in a leisurelymanner across the room, past his bed, and sat down in an armchair—"and sounflatteringly. It's an admission that I need to show special cause fortaking your time. Should I make an appointment through your secretary?"

He stood in the middle of the room, holding the cigarette at his lips,looking at her. volunteering no answer.

She laughed. "My reason is so unusual that I know it will never occur toyou: loneliness, darling. Do you mind throwing a few crumbs of your expensiveattention to a beggar? Do you mind if I stay here without any formal reasonat all?"

"No," he said quietly, "not if you wish to."

"I have nothing weighty to discuss—no million-dollar orders, notranscontinental deals, no rails, no bridges. Not even the politicalsituation. I just want to chatter like a woman about perfectly unimportantthings."

"Go ahead."

"Henry, there's no better way to stop me, is there?" She had an air ofhelpless, appealing sincerity. "What can I say after that? Suppose I wantedto tell you about the new novel which Balph Eubank is writing—he isdedicating it to me—would that interest you?"

"If it's the truth that you want—not in the least."

She laughed. "And if it's not the truth that I want?"

"Then I wouldn't know what to say," he answered—and felt a rush of bloodto his brain, tight as a slap, realizing suddenly the double infamy of a lieuttered in protestation of honesty; he had said it sincerely, but it implieda boast to which he had no right any longer. "Why would you want it, if it'snot the truth?" he asked. "What for?"

"Now you see, that's the cruelty of conscientious people. You wouldn'tunderstand it—would you?—if I answered that real devotion consists of beingwilling to lie, cheat and fake in order to make another person happy—tocreate for him the reality he wants, if he doesn't like the one that exists."

"No," he said slowly, "I wouldn't understand it."

"It's really very simple. If you tell a beautiful woman that she isbeautiful, what have you given her? It's no more than a fact and it has costyou nothing. But if you tell an ugly woman that she is beautiful, you offerher the great homage of corrupting the concept of beauty. To love a woman forher virtues is meaningless. She's earned it, it's a payment, not a gift. Butto love her for her vices is a real gift, unearned and undeserved. To loveher for her vices is to defile all virtue for her sake—and that is a realtribute of love, because you sacrifice your conscience, your reason, yourintegrity and your invaluable self-esteem."

He looked at her blankly. It sounded like some sort of monstrouscorruption that precluded the possibility of wondering whether anyone couldmean it; he wondered only what was the point of uttering it.

"What's love, darling, if it's not self-sacrifice?" she went on lightly,in the tone of a drawing-room discussion. "What's self-sacrifice, unless one

sacrifices that which is one's most precious and most important? But I don'texpect you to understand it. Not a stainless-steel Puritan like you.

That's the immense selfishness of the Puritan. You'd let the whole worldperish rather than soil that immaculate self of yours with a single spot ofwhich you'd have to be ashamed."

He said slowly, his voice oddly strained and solemn, "I have never claimedto be immaculate."

She laughed. "And what is it you're being right now? You're giving me anhonest answer, aren't you?" She shrugged her naked shoulders.

"Oh, darling, don't take me seriously! I'm just talking."

He ground his cigarette into an ashtray; he did not answer.

"Darling," she said, "I actually came here only because I kept thinkingthat I had a husband and I wanted to find out what he looked like."

She studied him as he stood across the room, the tall, straight, tautlines of his body emphasized by the single color of the dark blue pajamas.

"You're very attractive," she said. "You look so much better—these lastfew months. Younger. Should I say happier? You look less tense.

Oh, I know you're rushed more than ever and you act like a commander in anair raid, but that's only the surface. You're less tense-inside . "

He looked at her, astonished. It was true; he had not known it, had notadmitted it to himself. He wondered at her power of observation.

She had seen little of him in these last few months. He had not enteredher bedroom since his return from Colorado. He had thought that she wouldwelcome their isolation from each other. Now he wondered what motive couldhave made her so sensitive to a change in him—unless it was a feeling muchgreater than he had ever suspected her of experiencing.

"I was not aware of it," he said.

"It's quite becoming, dear—and astonishing, since you've been having sucha terribly difficult time."

He wondered whether this was intended as a question. She paused, as ifwaiting for an answer, but she did not press it and went on gaily: "I knowyou're having all sorts of trouble at the mills—and then the politicalsituation is getting to be ominous, isn't it? If they pass those laws they'retalking about, it will hit you pretty hard, won't it?"

"Yes. It will. But that is a subject which is of no interest to you,Lillian, is it?"

"Oh, but it is!" She raised her head and looked straight at him; her eyeshad the blank, veiled look he had seen before, a look of deliberate mysteryand of confidence in his inability to solve it. "It is of great interest tome . . . though not because of any possible financial losses,"

she added softly.

He wondered, for the first time, whether her spite, her sarcasm, thecowardly manner of delivering insults under the protection of a smile, werenot the opposite of what he had always taken them to be—not a method oftorture, but a twisted form of despair, not a desire to make him suffer, buta confession of her own pain, a defense for the pride of an unloved wife, asecret plea—so that the subtle, the hinted, the evasive in her manner, thething begging to be understood, was not the open malice, but the hidden love.He thought of it, aghast. It made his guilt greater than he had evercontemplated.

"If we're talking politics, Henry, I had an amusing thought. The side yourepresent—what is that slogan you all use so much, the motto you're supposedto stand for? 'The sanctity of contract'—is that it?"

She saw his swift glance, the intentness of his eyes, the first responseof something she had struck, and she laughed aloud.

"Go on," he said; his voice was low; it had the sound of a threat.

"Darling, what for?—since you understood me quite well."

"What was it you intended to say?" His voice was harshly precise andwithout any color of feeling.

"Do you really wish to bring me to the humiliation of complaining?

It's so trite and such a common complaint—although I did think I had ahusband who prides himself on being different from lesser men. Do you want meto remind you that you once swore to make my happiness the aim of your life?And that you can't really say in all honesty whether I'm happy or unhappy,because you haven't even inquired whether I exist?"

He felt them as a physical pain—all the things that came tearing at himimpossibly together. Her words were a plea, he thought—and he felt the dark,hot flow of guilt. He felt pity—the cold ugliness of pity without affection.He felt a dim anger, like a voice he tried to choke, a voice crying inrevulsion: Why should I deal with her rotten, twisted lying?—why should Iaccept torture for the sake of pity?—why is it I who should have to take thehopeless burden of trying to spare a feeling she won't admit, a feeling Ican't know or understand or try to guess?

—if she loves me, why doesn't the damn coward say so and let us both faceit in the open? He heard another, louder voice, saying evenly: Don't switchthe blame to her, that's the oldest trick of all cowards—

you're guilty—no matter what she does, it's nothing compared to yourguilt—she's right—it makes you sick, doesn't it, to know it's she who'sright?—let it make you sick, you damn adulterer—it's she who's right!

"What would make you happy, Lillian?" he asked. His voice was toneless.

She smiled, leaning back in her chair, relaxing; she had been watching hisface intently.

"Oh, dear!" she said, as in bored amusement. "That's the shyster question.The loophole. The escape clause."

She got up, letting her arms fall with a shrug, stretching her body in alimp, graceful gesture of helplessness.

"What would make me happy, Henry? That is what you ought to tell me. Thatis what you should have discovered for me. I don't know. You were to createit and offer it to me. That was your trust, your obligation, yourresponsibility. But you won't be the first man to default on that promise.It's the easiest of all debts to repudiate. Oh, you'd never welsh on apayment for a load of iron ore delivered to you. Only on a life."

She was moving casually across the room, the green-yellow folds of herskirt coiling in long waves about her, "I know that claims of this kind areimpractical," she said. "I have no mortgage on you, no collateral, no guns,no chains. I have no hold on you at all, Henry—nothing but your honor."

He stood looking at her as if it took all of his effort to keep his eyesdirected at her face, to keep seeing her, to endure the sight. "What do youwant?" he asked.

"Darling, there are so many things you could guess by yourself, if youreally wished to know what I want. For instance, if you have been avoiding meso blatantly for months, wouldn't I want to know the reason?"

"I have been very busy."

She shrugged. "A wife expects to be the first concern of her husband'sexistence. I didn't know that when you swore to forsake all others, it didn'tinclude blast furnaces."

She came closer and, with an amused smile that seemed to mock them both,she slipped her arms around him.

It was the swift, instinctive, ferocious gesture of a young bridegroom atthe unrequested contact of a whore—the gesture with which he tore her armsoff his body and threw her aside.

He stood, paralyzed, shocked by the brutality of his own reaction.

She was staring at him, her face naked in bewilderment, with no mystery,no pretense or protection; whatever calculations she had made, this was athing she had not expected.

"I'm sorry, Lillian . . ."he said, his voice low, a voice of sincerityand of suffering.

She did not answer.

"I'm sorry . . . It's just that I'm very tired," he added, his voicelifeless; he was broken by the triple lie, one part of which was a disloyaltyhe could not bear to face; it was not the disloyalty to Lillian.

She gave a brief chuckle. "Well, if that's the effect your work has onyou, I may come to approve of it. Do forgive me, I was merely trying to do myduty. I thought that you were a sensualist who'd never rise above theinstincts of an animal in the gutter. I'm not one of those bitches who belongin it." She was snapping the words dryly, absently, without thinking. Hermind was on a question mark, racing over every possible answer.

It was her last sentence that made him face her suddenly, face her simply,directly, not as one on the defensive any longer. "Lillian, what purpose doyou live for?" he asked.

"What a crude question! No enlightened person would ever ask it."

"Well, what is it that enlightened people do with their lives?"

"Perhaps they do not attempt to do anything. That is their enlightenment."

"What do they do with their time?"

"They certainly don't spend it on manufacturing plumbing pipes.""Tell me, why do you keep making those cracks? I know that you feelcontempt for the plumbing pipes. You've made that clear long ago.Your contempt means nothing to me. Why keep repeating it?"

He wondered why this hit her; he did not know in what manner, but he knewthat it did. He wondered why he felt with absolute certainty that that hadbeen the right thing to say.

She asked, her voice dry, "What's the purpose of the suddenquestionnaire?"

He answered simply, "I'd like to know whether there's anything that youreally want. If there is, I'd like to give it to you, if I can."

"You'd like to buy it? That's all you know—paying for things. You get offeasily, don't you? No, it's not as simple as that. What I want is non-material . "

"What is it?"

"You."

"How do you mean that, Lillian? You don't mean it in the gutter sense.""No, not in the gutter sense.""How, then?"

She was at the door, she turned, she raised her head to look at him andsmiled coldly.

"You wouldn't understand it," she said and walked out.

The torture remaining to him was the knowledge that she would never wantto leave him and he would never have the right to leave—

the thought that he owed her at least the feeble recognition of sympathy,of respect for a feeling he could neither understand nor return—

the knowledge that he could summon nothing for her, except contempt, astrange, total, unreasoning contempt, impervious to pity, to reproach, to hisown pleas for justice—and, hardest to bear, the proud revulsion against hisown verdict, against his demand that he consider himself lower than thiswoman he despised.

Then it did not matter to him any longer, it all receded into some outerdistance, leaving only the thought that he was willing to bear anything—leaving him in a state which was both tension and peace—because he lay inbed, his face pressed to the pillow, thinking of Dagny, of her slender,

sensitive body stretched beside him, trembling under the touch of hisfingers. He wished she were back in New York. If she were, he would have gonethere, now, at once, in the middle of the night.

Eugene Lawson sat at his desk as if it were the control panel of a bomberplane commanding a continent below. But he forgot it, at times, and sloucheddown, his muscles going slack inside his suit, as if he were pouting at theworld. His mouth was the one part of him which he could not pull tight at anytime; it was uncomfortably prominent in his lean face, attracting the eyes ofany listener: when he spoke, the movement ran through his lower lip, twistingits moist flesh into extraneous contortions of its own.

"I am not ashamed of it," said Eugene Lawson. "Miss Taggart, I want you toknow that I am not ashamed of my past career as president of the CommunityNational Bank of Madison."

"I haven't made any reference to shame," said Dagny coldly.

"No moral guilt can be attached to me, inasmuch as I lost everything Ipossessed in the crash of that bank. It seems to me that I would have theright to feel proud of such a sacrifice."

"I merely wanted to ask you some questions about the Twentieth CenturyMotor Company which—"

"I shall be glad to answer any questions. I have nothing to hide. Myconscience is clear. If you thought that the subject was embarrassing to me,you were mistaken.'1

"I wanted to inquire about the men who owned the factory at the time whenyou made a loan to—"

"They were perfectly good men. They were a perfectly sound risk-though, of course, I am speaking in human terms, not in the terms of coldcash, which you are accustomed to expect from bankers. I granted them theloan for the purchase of that factory, because they needed the money. Ifpeople needed money, that was enough for me. Need was my standard, MissTaggart. Need, not greed. My father and grandfather built up the CommunityNational Bank just to amass a fortune for themselves. I placed their fortunein the service of a higher ideal. I did not sit on piles of money and demandcollateral from poor people who needed loans. The heart was my collateral. Ofcourse, I do not expect anyone in this materialistic country to understandme. The rewards I got were not of a kind that people of your class, MissTaggart, would appreciate. The people who used to sit in front of my desk atthe bank, did not sit as you do, Miss Taggart. They were humble, uncertain,worn with care, afraid to speak. My rewards were the tears of gratitude intheir eyes, the trembling voices, the blessings, the woman who kissed my handwhen I granted her a loan she had begged for in vain everywhere else."

"Will you please tell me the names of the men who owned the motorfactory?"

"That factory was essential to the region, absolutely essential. I wasperfectly justified in granting that loan. It provided employment forthousands of workers who had no other means of livelihood."

"Did you know any of the people who worked in the factory?"

"Certainly. I knew them all. It was men that interested me, not machines.I was concerned with the human side of industry, not the cash register side."

She leaned eagerly across the desk. "Did you know any of the engineers whoworked there?"

"The engineers? No, no. I was much more democratic than that. It's thereal workers that interested me. The common men. They all knew me by sight. Iused to come into the shops and they would wave and shout, 'Hello, Gene.'That's what they called me—Gene. But I'm sure this is of no interest to you.It's past history. Now if you really came to Washington in order to talk tome about your railroad"—he straightened up briskly, the bomber-plane posereturning—"I don't know whether I can promise you any special consideration,

inasmuch as I must hold the national welfare above any private privileges orinterests which—"

"1 didn't come to talk to you about my railroad," she said, looking at himin bewilderment. "I have no desire to talk to you about my railroad.""No?" He sounded disappointed.

"No. I came for information about the motor factory. Could you possiblyrecall the names of any of the engineers who worked there?"

"I don't believe I ever inquired about their names. I wasn't concernedwith the parasites of office and laboratory. I was concerned with the realworkers—the men of calloused hands who keep a factory going. They were myfriends."

"Can you give me a few of their names? Any names, of anyone who workedthere?"

"My dear Miss Taggart, it was so long ago, there were thousands of them,how can I remember?"

"Can't you recall one, any one?"

"I certainly cannot. So many people have always filled my life that Ican't be expected to recall individual drops in the ocean."

"Were you familiar with the production of that factory? With the kind ofwork they were doing—or planning?"

"Certainly. I took a personal interest in all my investments. I went toinspect that factory very often. They were doing exceedingly well.

They were accomplishing wonders. The workers' housing conditions were thebest in the country. I saw lace curtains at every window and flowers on thewindow sills. Every home had a plot of ground for a garden. They had built anew schoolhouse for the children."

"Did you know anything about the work of the factory's researchlaboratory?"

"Yes, yes, they had a wonderful research laboratory, very advanced, verydynamic, with forward vision and great plans."

"Do you . . . remember hearing anything about . . . any plans to produce anew type of motor?"

"Motor? What motor, Miss Taggart? I had no time for details. My objectivewas social progress, universal prosperity, human brotherhood and love. Love,Miss Taggart. That is the key to everything. If men learned to love oneanother, it would solve all their problems."

She turned away, not to see the damp movements of his mouth.

A chunk of stone with Egyptian hieroglyphs lay on a pedestal in a cornerof the office—the statue of a Hindu goddess with six spider arms stood in aniche—and a huge graph of bewildering mathematical detail, like the saleschart of a mail-order house, hung on the wall.

"Therefore, if you're thinking of your railroad, Miss Taggart—as, ofcourse, you are, in view of certain possible developments—I must point out toyou that although the welfare of the country is my first consideration, towhich I would not hesitate to sacrifice anyone's profits, still, I have neverclosed my ears to a plea for mercy and—"

She looked at him and understood what it was that he wanted from her, whatsort of motive kept him going.

"I don't wish to discuss my railroad," she said, fighting to keep hervoice monotonously flat, while she wanted to scream in revulsion. "Anythingyou have to say on the subject, you will please say it to my brother, Mr.James Taggart."

"I'd think that at a time like this you wouldn't want to pass up a rareopportunity to plead your case before—"

"Have you preserved any records pertaining to the motor factory?"She sat straight, her hands clasped tight together.

"What records? I believe I told you that I lost everything I owned whenthe bank collapsed." His body had gone slack once more, his interest hadvanished. "But I do not mind it. What I lost was mere material wealth. I amnot the first man in history to suffer for an ideal. I was defeated by theselfish greed of those around me. I couldn't establish a system ofbrotherhood and love in just one small state, amidst a nation of profit-seekers and dollar-grubbers. It was not my fault. But I won't let them beatme. I am not to be stopped. I am fighting—on a wider scale—for the privilegeof serving my fellow men. Records, Miss Taggart? The record I left, when Ideparted from Madison, is inscribed in the hearts of the poor, who had neverhad a chance before."

She did not want to utter a single unnecessary word; but she could notstop herself: she kept seeing the figure of the old charwoman scrubbing thesteps. "Have you seen that section of the country since?" she asked.

"It's not my fault!" he yelled. "It's the fault of the rich who still hadmoney, but wouldn't sacrifice it to save my bank and the people of Wisconsin!You can't blame me! I lost everything!"

"Mr. Lawson," she said with effort, "do you perhaps recall the name of theman who headed the corporation that owned the factory? The corporation towhich you lent the money. It was called Amalgamated Service, wasn't it? Whowas its president?"

"Oh, him? Yes, I remember him. His name was Lee Hunsacker. A veryworthwhile young man, who's taken a terrible beating."

"Where is he now? Do you know his address?"

"Why—I believe he's somewhere in Oregon. Grangeville, Oregon.

My secretary can give you his address. But I don't see of what interest .. . Miss Taggart, if what you have in mind is to try to see Mr.

Wesley Mouch, let me tell you that Mr. Mouch attaches a great deal ofweight to my opinion in matters affecting such issues as railroads and other—

"I have no desire to see Mr. Mouch," she said, rising.

"But then, I can't understand . . . What, really, was your purpose incoming here?"

"I am trying to find a certain man who used to work for the TwentiethCentury Motor Company."

"Why do you wish to find him?"

"I want him to work for my railroad."

He spread his arms wide, looking incredulous and slightly indignant.

"At such a moment, when crucial issues hang in the balance, you choose towaste your time on looking for some one employee? Believe me, the fate ofyour railroad depends on Mr. Mouch much more than on any employee you everfind."

"Good day," she said.

She had turned to go, when he said, his voice jerky and high, "You haven'tany right to despise me."

She stopped to look at him. "I have expressed no opinion."

"I am perfectly innocent, since I lost my money, since I lost all of myown money for a good cause. My motives were pure. I wanted nothing formyself. I've never sought anything for myself. Miss Taggart, I can proudlysay that in all of my life I have never made a profit!"

Her voice was quiet, steady and solemn: "Mr. Lawson, I think I should letyou know that of all the statements a man can make, that is the one Iconsider most despicable."

"I never had a chance!" said Lee Hunsacker.

He sat in the middle of the kitchen, at a table cluttered with papers.He needed a shave; his shirt needed laundering. It was hard to judge hisage: the swollen flesh of his face looked smooth and blank, untouched by

experience; the graying hair and filmy eyes looked worn by exhaustion; he wasforty-two.

"Nobody ever gave me a chance. I hope they're satisfied with what they'vemade of me. But don't think that I don't know it. I know I was cheated out ofmy birthright. Don't let them put on any airs about how kind they are.They're a stinking bunch of hypocrites."

"Who?" asked Dagny.

"Everybody," said Lee Hunsacker. "People are bastards at heart and it's nouse pretending otherwise. Justice? Huh! Look at it!" His arm swept aroundhim. "A man like me reduced to this!"

Beyond the window, the light of noon looked like grayish dusk among thebleak roofs and naked trees of a place that was not country and could neverquite become a town. Dusk and dampness seemed soaked into the walls of thekitchen. A pile of breakfast dishes lay in the sink; a pot of stew simmeredon the stove, emitting steam with the greasy odor of cheap meat; a dustytypewriter stood among the papers on the table.

"The Twentieth Century Motor Company," said Lee Hunsacker, "was one of themost illustrious names in the history of American industry. I was thepresident of that company. I owned that factory.

But they wouldn't give me a chance."

"You were not the president of the Twentieth Century Motor Company, wereyou? I believe you headed a corporation called Amalgamated Service?"

"Yes, yes, but it's the same thing. We took over their factory. We weregoing to do just as well as they did. Better. We were just as important. Whothe hell was Jed Starnes anyway? Nothing but a backwoods garage mechanic—didyou know that that's how he started?—without any background at all. My familyonce belonged to the New York Four Hundred. My grandfather was a member ofthe national legislature. It's not my fault that my father couldn't afford togive me a car of my own, when he sent me to school. All the other boys hadcars. My family name was just as good as any of theirs. When I went tocollege—" He broke off abruptly. "What newspaper did you say you're from?"

She had given him her name; she did not know why she now felt glad that hehad not recognized it and why she preferred not to enlighten him. "I did notsay I was from a newspaper," she answered, "j need some information on thatmotor factory for a private purpose of my own, not for publication."

"Oh." He looked disappointed. He went on sullenly, as if she were guiltyof a deliberate offense against him. "I thought maybe you came for an advanceinterview because I'm writing my autobiography." He pointed to the papers onthe table. "And what I intend to tell is plenty.

I intend—Oh, hell!" he said suddenly, remembering something.

He rushed to the stove, lifted the lid off the pot and went through themotions of stirring the stew, hatefully, paying no attention to hisperformance. He flung the wet spoon down on the stove, letting the greasedrip into the gas burners, and came back to the table.

"Yeah, I'll write my autobiography if anybody ever gives me a chance," hesaid. "How can I concentrate on serious work when this is the sort of thing Ihave to do?" He jerked his head at the stove.

"Friends, huh! Those people think that just because they took me in, theycan exploit me like a Chinese coolie! Just because I had no other place togo. They have it easy, those good old friends of mine. He never lifts afinger around the house, just sits in his store all day; a lousy little two-bit stationery store—can it compare in importance with the book I'm writing?And she goes out shopping and asks me to watch her damn stew for her. Sheknows that a writer needs peace and concentration, but does she care aboutthat? Do you know what she did today?" He leaned confidentially across thetable, pointing at the dishes in the sink. "She went to the market and leftall the breakfast dishes there and said she'd do them later. I know what she

wanted. She expected me to do them. Well, I'll fool her. I'll leave them justwhere they are."

"Would you allow me to ask you a few questions about the motor factory?"

"Don't imagine that that motor factory was the only thing in my life.

I'd held many important positions before. I was prominently connected, atvarious times, with enterprises manufacturing surgical appliances, papercontainers, men's hats and vacuum cleaners. Of course, that sort of stuffdidn't give me much scope. But the motor factory—that was my big chance. Thatwas what I'd been waiting for."

"How did you happen to acquire it?"

"It was meant for me. It was my dream come true. The factory was 'shutdown—bankrupt. The heirs of Jed Starnes had run it into the ground prettyfast. I don't know exactly what it was, but there had been something goofygoing on up there, so the company went broke. The railroad people closedtheir branch line. Nobody wanted the place, nobody would bid on it. But thereit was, this great factory, with all the equipment, all the machinery, allthe things that had made millions for Jed Starnes. That was the kind of setupI wanted, the kind of opportunity I was entitled to. So I got a few friendstogether and we formed the Amalgamated Service Corporation and we scraped upa little money. But we didn't have enough, we needed a loan to help us outand give us a start. It was a perfectly safe bet, we were young men embarkingon great careers, full of eagerness and hope for the future.

But do you think anybody gave us any encouragement? They did not.

Not those greedy, entrenched vultures of privilege! How were we to succeedin life if nobody would give us a factory? We couldn't compete against thelittle snots who inherit whole chains of factories, could we?

Weren't we entitled to the same break? Aw, don't let me hear anythingabout justice! I worked like a dog, trying to get somebody to lend us themoney. But that bastard Midas Mulligan put me through the wringer."

She sat up straight. "Midas Mulligan?"

"Yeah—the banker who looked like a truck driver and acted it, too!""Did you know Midas Mulligan?"

"Did I know him? I'm the only man who ever beat him—not that it did me anygood!"

At odd moments, with a sudden sense of uneasiness, she had wondered—as shewondered about the stories of deserted ships found floating at sea or ofsourceless lights flashing in the sky—about the disappearance of MidasMulligan. There was no reason why she felt that she had to solve theseriddles, except that they were mysteries which had no business beingmysteries: they could not be causeless, yet no known cause could explainthem.

Midas Mulligan had once been the richest and, consequently, the mostdenounced man in the country. He had never taken a loss on any investment hemade; everything he touched turned into gold. "It's because I know what totouch," he said. Nobody could grasp the pattern of his investments: herejected deals that were considered flawlessly safe, and he put enormousamounts into ventures that no other banker would handle. Through the years,he had been the trigger that had sent unexpected, spectacular bullets ofindustrial success shooting over the country. It was he who had invested inRearden Steel at its start, thus helping Rearden to complete the purchase ofthe abandoned steel mills in Pennsylvania. When an economist referred to himonce as an audacious gambler, Mulligan said, "The reason why you'll never getrich is because you think that what I do is gambling."

It was rumored that one had to observe a certain unwritten rule whendealing with Midas Mulligan: if an applicant for a loan ever mentioned hispersonal need or any personal feeling whatever, the interview ended and hewas never given another chance to speak to Mr. Mulligan.

"Why yes, I can," said Midas Mulligan, when he was asked whether he couldname a person more evil than the man with a heart closed to pity. "The manwho uses another's pity for him as a weapon."

In his long career, he had ignored all the public attacks on him, exceptone. His first name had been Michael; when a newspaper columnist of thehumanitarian clique nicknamed him Midas Mulligan and the tag stuck to him asan insult, Mulligan appeared in court and petitioned for a legal change ofhis first name to "Midas." The petition was granted.

In the eyes of his contemporaries, he was a man who had committed the oneunforgivable sin: he was proud of his wealth.

These were the things Dagny had heard about Midas Mulligan; she had nevermet him. Seven years ago, Midas Mulligan had vanished.

He left his home one morning and was never heard from again. On the nextday, the depositors of the Mulligan Bank in Chicago received noticesrequesting that they withdraw their funds, because the bank was closing. Inthe investigations that followed, it was learned that Mulligan had plannedthe closing in advance and in minute detail; his employees were merelycarrying out his instructions. It was the most orderly run on a bank that thecountry ever witnessed. Every depositor received his money down to the lastfraction of interest due. All of the bank's assets had been sold piecemeal tovarious financial institutions. When the books were balanced, it was foundthat they balanced perfectly, to the penny; nothing was left over; theMulligan Bank had been wiped out.

No clue was ever found to Mulligan's motive, to his personal fate or tothe many millions of his personal fortune. The man and the fortune vanishedas if they had never existed. No one had had any warning about his decision,and no events could be traced to explain it. If he had wished to retire-people wondered—why hadn't he sold his establishment at a huge profit, as hecould have done, instead of destroying it? There was nobody to give ananswer. He had no family, no friends.

His servants knew nothing: he had left his home that morning as usual anddid not come back; that was all.

There was—Dagny had thought uneasily for years—a quality of the impossibleabout Mulligan's disappearance; it was as if a New York skyscraper hadvanished one night, leaving nothing behind but a vacant lot on a streetcorner. A man like Mulligan, and a fortune such as he had taken along withhim, could not stay hidden anywhere; a skyscraper could not get lost, itwould be seen rising above any plain or forest chosen for its hiding place;were it destroyed, even its pile of rubble could not remain unnoticed. ButMulligan had gone—and in the seven years since, in the mass of rumors,guesses, theories, Sunday supplement stories, and eyewitnesses who claimed tohave seen him in every part of the world, no clue to a plausible explanationhad ever been discovered.

Among the stories, there was one so preposterously out of character thatDagny believed it to be true: nothing in Mulligan's nature could have givenanyone ground to invent it. It was said that the last person to see him, onthe spring morning of his disappearance, was an old woman who sold flowers ona Chicago street corner by the Mulligan Bank. She related that he stopped andbought a bunch of the year's first bluebells. His face was the happiest faceshe had ever seen; he had the look of a youth starting out into a great,unobstructed vision of life lying open before him; the marks of pain andtension, the sediment of years upon a human face, had been wiped off, andwhat remained was only joyous eagerness and peace. He picked up the flowersas if on a sudden impulse, and he winked at the old woman, as if he had someshining joke to share with her. He said, "Do you know how much I've alwaysloved it—being alive?" She stared at him, bewildered, and he walked away,tossing the flowers like a ball in his hand—a broad, straight figure in a

sedate, expensive, businessman's overcoat, going off into the distanceagainst the straight cliffs of office buildings with the spring sun sparklingon their windows.

"Midas Mulligan was a vicious bastard with a dollar sign stamped on hisheart," said Lee Hunsacker, in the fumes of the acrid stew. "My whole futuredepended upon a miserable half-million dollars, which was just small changeto him, bat when I applied for a loan, he turned me down flat—for no betterreason than that I had no collateral to offer.

How could I have accumulated any collateral, when nobody had ever given mea chance at anything big? Why did he lend money to others, but not to me? Itwas plain discrimination. He didn't even care about my feelings—he said thatmy past record of failures disqualified me for ownership of a vegetablepushcart, let alone a motor factory. What failures? I couldn't help it if alot of ignorant grocers refused to co-operate with me about the papercontainers. By what right did he pass judgment on my ability? Why did myplans for my own future have to depend upon the arbitrary opinion of aselfish monopolist? I wasn't going to stand for that. I wasn't going to takeit lying down. I brought suit against him."

"You did what?"

"Oh yes," he said proudly, "I brought suit. I'm sure it would seem strangein some of your hidebound Eastern states, but the state of Illinois had avery humane, very progressive law under which I could sue him. I must say itwas the first case of its kind, but I had a very smart, liberal lawyer whosaw a way for us to do it. It was an economic emergency law which said thatpeople were forbidden to discriminate for any reason whatever against anyperson in any matter involving his livelihood. It was used to protect daylaborers and such, but it applied to me and my partners as well, didn't it?So we went to court, and we testified about the bad breaks we'd all had inthe past, and I quoted Mulligan saying that I couldn't even own a vegetablepushcart, and we proved that all the members of the Amalgamated Servicecorporation had no prestige, no credit, no way to make a living —and,therefore, the purchase of the motor factory was our only chance oflivelihood—and, therefore, Midas Mulligan had no right to discriminateagainst us—and, therefore, we were entitled to demand a loan from him underthe law. Oh, we had a perfect case all right, but the man who presided at thetrial was Judge Narragansett, one of those old-fashioned monks of the benchwho thinks like a mathematician and never feels the human side of anything.He just sat there all through the trial like a marble statue—like one ofthose blindfolded marble statues, At the end, he instructed the jury to bringin a verdict in favor of Midas Mulligan—and he said some very harsh thingsabout me and my partners. But we appealed to a higher court—and the highercourt reversed the verdict and ordered Mulligan to give us the loan on ourterms. He had three months in which to comply, but before the three monthswere up, something happened that nobody can figure out and he vanished intothin air, he and his bank. There wasn't an extra penny left of that bank, tocollect our lawful claim. We wasted a lot of money on detectives, trying tofind him—as who didn't?—but we gave it up."

No—thought Dagny—no, apart from the sickening feeling it gave her, thiscase was not much worse than any of the other things that Midas Mulligan hadborne for years. He had taken many losses under laws of a similar justice,under rules and edicts that had cost him much larger sums of money; he hadborne them and fought and worked the harder; it was not likely that this casehad broken him.

"What happened to Judge Narragansett?" she asked involuntarily, andwondered what subconscious connection had made her ask it. She knew littleabout Judge Narragansett, but she had heard and remembered his name, because

it was a name that belonged so exclusively to the North American continent.Now she realized suddenly that she had heard nothing about him for years.

"Oh, he retired," said Lee Hunsacker.

"He did?" The question was almost a gasp.

"Yeah."

"When?"

"Oh, about six months later.""What did he do after he retired?"

"I don't know. I don't think anybody's heard from him since."

He wondered why she looked frightened. Part of the fear she felt, was thatshe could not name its reason, either. "Please tell me about the motorfactory," she said with effort.

"Well, Eugene Lawson of the Community National Bank in Madison finallygave us a loan to buy the factory—but he was just a messy cheapskate, hedidn't have enough money to see us through, he couldn't help us when we wentbankrupt. It was not our fault. We had everything against us from the start.How could we run a factory when we had no railroad? Weren't we entitled to arailroad? I tried to get them to reopen their branch line, but those damnpeople at Taggart Trans—"

He stopped. "Say, are you by any chance one of those Taggarts?"

"I am the Operating Vice-President of Taggart Transcontinental."

For a moment, he stared at her in blank stupor; she saw the struggle offear, obsequiousness and hatred in his filmy eyes. The result was a suddensnarl: "I don't need any of you big shots! Don't think I'm going to be afraidof you. Don't expect me to beg for a job. I'm not asking favors of anybody. Ibet you're not used to hear people talk to you this way, are you?"

"Mr. Hunsacker, I will appreciate it very much if you will give me theinformation I need about the factory."

"You're a little late getting interested. What's the matter? Yourconscience bothering you? You people let Jed Starnes grow filthy rich on thatfactory, but you wouldn't give us a break. It was the same factory.

We did everything he did. We started right in manufacturing the particulartype of motor that had been his biggest money-maker for years. And then somenewcomer nobody ever heard of opened a two bit factory down in Colorado, bythe name of Nielsen Motors, and put out a new motor of the same class as theStarnes model, at half the price! We couldn't help that, could we? It was allright for Jed Starnes, no destructive competitor happened to come up in histime, but what were we to do? How could we fight this Nielsen, when nobodyhad given us a motor to compete with his?"

"Did you take over the Starnes research laboratory?"

"Yes, yes, it was there. Everything was there."

"His staff, too?"

"Oh, some of them. A lot of them had gone while the factory was closed.""His research staff?""They were gone."

"Did you hire any research men of your own?"

"Yes, yes, some—but let me tell you, I didn't have much money to spend onsuch things as laboratories, when I never had enough funds to give me abreathing spell. I couldn't even pay the bills I owed for the absolutelyessential modernizing and redecorating which I'd had to do —that factory wasdisgracefully old-fashioned from the standpoint of human efficiency. Theexecutive offices had bare plaster walls and a dinky little washroom. Anymodern psychologist will tell you that nobody could do his best in suchdepressing surroundings. I had to have a brighter color scheme in my office,and a decent modern bathroom with a stall shower. Furthermore, I spent a lotof money on a new cafeteria and a playroom and rest room for the workers. Wehad to have morale, didn't we? Any enlightened person knows that man is made

by the material factors of his background, and that a man's mind is shaped byhis tools of production. But people wouldn't wait for the laws of economicdeterminism to operate upon us. We never had a motor factory before. We hadto let the tools condition our minds, didn't we? But nobody gave us time.""Can you tell me about the work of your research staff?"

"Oh, I had a group of very promising young men, all of them guaranteed bydiplomas from the best universities. But it didn't do me any good. I don'tknow what they were doing. I think they were just sitting around, eating uptheir salaries."

"Who was in charge of your laboratory?"

"Hell, how can I remember that now?"

"Do you remember any of the names of your research staff?""Do you think I had time to meet every hireling in person?""Did any of them ever mention to you any experiments with a . . .with an entirely new kind of motor?"

"What motor? Let me tell you that an executive of my position does nothang around laboratories. I spent most of my time in New York and Chicago,trying to raise money to keep us going."

"Who was the general manager of tie factory?"

"A very able fellow by the name of Roy Cunningham. He died last year in anauto accident. Drunk driving, they said."

"Can you give me the names and addresses of any of your associates? Anyoneyou remember?"

"I don't know what's become of them. I wasn't in a mood to keep track ofthat."

"Have you preserved any of the factory records?""I certainly have."

She sat up eagerly. "Would you let me see them?""You bet!"

He seemed eager to comply; he rose at once and hurried out of the room.What he put down before her, when he returned, was a thick album ofclippings: it contained his newspaper interviews and his press agent'sreleases.

"I was one of the big industrialists, too," he said proudly. "I was anational figure, as you can see. My life will make a book of deep, humansignificance. I'd have written it long ago, if I had the proper tools ofproduction." He banged angrily upon his typewriter. "I can't work on thisdamn thing. It skips spaces. How can I get any inspiration and write a bestseller with a typewriter that skips spaces?"

"Thank you, Mr. Hunsacker," she said. "I believe this is all you can tellme." She rose. "You don't happen to know what became of the Starnes heirs?"

"Oh, they ran for cover after they'd wrecked the factory. There were threeof them, two sons and a daughter. Last I heard, they were hiding their facesout in Durance, Louisiana."

The last sight she caught of Lee Hunsacker, as she turned to go, was hissudden leap to the stove; he seized the lid off the pot and dropped it to thefloor, scorching his fingers and cursing: the stew was burned.

Little was left of the Starnes fortune and less of the Starnes heirs.

"You won't like having to see them, Miss Taggart," said the chief ofpolice of Durance, Louisiana; he was an elderly man with a slow, firm mannerand a look of bitterness acquired not in blind resentment., but in fidelityto clear-cut standards. "There's all sorts of human beings to see in theworld, there's murderers and criminal maniacs—but, somehow, I think theseStarnes persons are what decent people shouldn't have to see. They're a badsort, Miss Taggart. Clammy and bad . . .

Yes, they're still here in town—two of them, that is. The third one is:dead. Suicide. That was four years ago. It's an ugly story. He was the

youngest of the three, Eric Starnes. He was one of those chronic young menwho go around whining about their sensitive feelings, when they're well pastforty. He needed love, was his line. He was being kept by older women, whenhe could find them. Then he started running after a girl of sixteen, a nicegirl who wouldn't have anything to do with him.

She married a boy she was engaged to. Eric Starnes got into their house onthe wedding day, and when they came back from church after the ceremony, theyfound him in their bedroom, dead, messy dead, his wrists slashed. . . . Now Isay there might be forgiveness for a man who kills himself quietly. Who canpass judgment on another man's suffering and on the limit of what he canbear? But the man who kills himself, making a show of his death in order tohurt somebody, the man who gives his life for malice—there's no forgivenessfor him, no excuse, he's rotten clear through, and what he deserves is thatpeople spit at his memory, instead of feeling sorry for him and hurt, as hewanted them to be. . . . Well, that was Eric Starnes. I can tell you where tofind the other two, if you wish."

She found Gerald Starnes in the ward of a flophouse. He lay half twistedon a cot. His hair was still black, but the white stubble of his chin waslike a mist of dead weeds over a vacant face. He was soggy drunk. A pointlesschuckle kept breaking his voice when he spoke, the sound of a static,unfocused malevolence, "It went bust, the great factory. That's what happenedto it. Just went up and bust. Does that bother you, madam? The factory wasrotten. Everybody is rotten. I'm supposed to beg somebody's pardon, but Iwon't. I don't give a damn. People get fits trying to keep up the show, whenit's all rot, black rot, the automobiles, the buildings and the souls, and itdoesn't make any difference, one way or another. You should've seen the kindof literati who turned flip-flops when I whistled, when I had the dough. Theprofessors, the poets, the intellectuals, the world-savers and the brother-lovers. Any way I whistled. I had lots of fun. I wanted to do good, but now Idon't. There isn't any good. Not any goddamn good in the whole goddamnuniverse. I don't propose to take a bath if I don't feel like it, and that'sthat. If you want to know anything about the factory, ask my sister. My sweetsister who had a trust fund they couldn't touch, so she got out of it safe,even if she's in the hamburger class now, not the filet mignon a la SauceBearnaise, but would she give a penny of it to her brother? The noble planthat busted was her idea as much as mine, but will she give me a penny?

Hah! Go take a look at the duchess, take a look. What do I care about thefactory? It was just a pile of greasy machinery. I'll sell you all my rights,claims and title to it—for a drink. I'm the last of the Starnes name. It usedto be a great name—Starnes. I'll sell it to you. You think I'm a stinkingbum, but that goes for all the rest of them and for rich ladies like you,too. I wanted to do good for humanity. Hah! I wish they'd all boil in oil. Belots of fun. I wish they'd choke. What does it matter? What does anythingmatter?"

On the next cot, a white-haired, shriveled little tramp turned in hissleep, moaning; a nickel clattered to the floor out of his rags. GeraldStarnes picked it up and slipped it into his own pocket. He glanced at Dagny.The creases of his face were a malignant smile.

"Want to wake him up and start trouble?" he asked. "If you do, I'll saythat you're lying."

The ill-smelling bungalow, where she found Ivy Starnes, stood on the edgeof town, by the shore of the Mississippi. Hanging strands of moss and clotsof waxy foliage made the thick vegetation look as if it were drooling; thetoo many draperies, hanging in the stagnant air of a small room, had the samelook. The smell came from undusted corners and from incense burning in silverjars at the feet of contorted Oriental deities. Ivy Starnes sat on a pillowlike a baggy Buddha. Her mouth was a tight little crescent, the petulant

mouth of a child demanding adulation—on the spreading, pallid face of a womanpast fifty. Her eyes were two lifeless puddles of water. Her voice had theeven, dripping monotone of rain: "I can't answer the kind of questions you'reasking, my girl. The research laboratory? The engineers? Why should Iremember anything about them? It was my father who was concerned with suchmatters, not I, My father was an evil man who cared for nothing but business.

He had no time for love, only for money. My brothers and I lived on adifferent plane. Our aim was not to produce gadgets, but to do good.

We brought a great, new plan into the factory. It was eleven years ago.

We were defeated by the greed, the selfishness and the base, animal natureof men. It was the eternal conflict between spirit and matter, between souland body. They would not renounce their bodies, which was all we asked ofthem. I do not remember any of those men. I do not care to remember. . . .The engineers? I believe it was they who started the hemophilia. . . . Yes,that is what I said: the hemophilia—

the slow leak—the loss of blood that cannot be stopped. They ran first.

They deserted us, one after another . . . Our plan? We put into practicethat noble historical precept: From each according to his ability, to eachaccording to his need. Everybody in the factory, from charwomen to president,received the same salary—the barest minimum necessary.

Twice a year, we all gathered in a mass meeting, where every personpresented his claim for what he believed to be his needs. We voted on everyclaim, and the will of the majority established every person's need and everyperson's ability. The income of the factory was distributed accordingly.Rewards were based on need, and penalties on ability. Those whose needs werevoted to be the greatest, received the most. Those who had not produced asmuch as the vote said they could, were fined and had to pay the fines byworking overtime without pay.

That was our plan. It was based on the principle of selflessness. Itrequired men to be motivated, not by personal gain, but by love for theirbrothers."

Dagny heard a cold, implacable voice saying somewhere within her: Rememberit—remember it well—it is not often that one can see pure evil—look at it-remember—and some day you'll find the words to name its essence. . . . Sheheard it through the screaming of other voices that cried in helplessviolence: It's nothing—I've heard it before —I'm hearing it everywhere—it'snothing but the same old tripe-why can't I stand it?—I can't stand it—I can't stand it!

"What's the matter with you, my girl? Why did you jump up like that? Whyare you shaking? . . . What? Do speak louder, I can't hear you. . . . How didthe plan work out? I do not care to discuss it.

Things became very ugly indeed and went fouler every year. It has cost memy faith in human nature. In four years, a plan conceived, not by the coldcalculations of the mind, but by the pure love of the heart, was brought toan end in the sordid mess of policemen, lawyers and bankruptcy proceedings.But I have seen my error and I am free of it, I am through with the world ofmachines, manufacturers and money, the world enslaved by matter. I amlearning the emancipation of the spirit, as revealed in the great secrets ofIndia, the release from bondage to flesh, the victory over physical nature,the triumph of the spirit over matter."

Through the blinding white glare of anger, Dagny was seeing a long stripof concrete that had been a road, with weeds rising from its cracks, and thefigure of a man contorted by a hand plow.

"But, my girl, I said that I do not remember. . . . But I do not knowtheir names, I do not know any names, I do not know what sort of adventurersmy father may have had in that laboratory! . . .

Don't you hear me? ... I am not accustomed to being questioned in suchmanner and . . . Don't keep repeating it. Don't you know any words but'engineer'? . . . Don't you hear me at all? . . . What's the matter with you?I—I don't like your face, you're . . . Leave me alone. I don't know who youare, I've never hurt you, I'm an old woman, don't look at me like that, I . .. Stand back! Don't come near me or I'll call for help! I'll . . . Oh, yes,yes, I know that one!

The chief engineer. Yes. He was the head of the laboratory. Yes.

William Hastings. That was his name—William Hastings. I remember.

He went off to Brandon, Wyoming. He quit the day after we introduced theplan. He was the second man to quit us. . . .No. No, I don't remember whowas the first. He wasn't anybody important."

The woman who opened the door had graying hair and a poised, distinguishedlook of grooming; it took Dagny a few seconds to realize that her garment wasonly a simple cotton housedress, "May I see Mr. William Hastings?" askedDagny.

The woman looked at her for the briefest instant of a pause; it was an oddglance, inquiring and grave. "May I ask your name?"

"I am Dagny Taggart, of Taggart Transcontinental."

"Oh. Please come in, Miss Taggart. I am Mrs. William Hastings."

The measured tone of gravity went through every syllable of her voice,like a warning. Her manner was courteous, but she did not smile.

It was a modest home in the suburbs of an industrial town. Bare treebranches cut across the bright, cold blue of the sky, on the top of the risethat led to the house. The walls of the living room were silver-gray;sunlight hit the crystal stand of a lamp with a white shade; beyond an opendoor, a breakfast nook was papered in red-dotted white.

"Were you acquainted with my husband in business, Miss Taggart?"

"No. I have never met Mr. Hastings. But I should like to speak to him on amatter of business of crucial importance."

"My husband died five years ago, Miss Taggart."

Dagny closed her eyes; the dull, sinking shock contained the conclusionsshe did not have to make in words: This, then, had been the man she wasseeking, and Rearden had been right; this was why the motor had been leftunclaimed on a junk pile.

"I'm sorry," she said, both to Mrs. Hastings and to herself.

The suggestion of a smile on Mrs. Hastings' face held sadness, but theface had no imprint of tragedy, only a grave look of firmness, acceptance andquiet serenity.

"Mrs. Hastings, would you permit me to ask you a few questions?""Certainly. Please sit down."

"Did you have some knowledge of your husband's scientific work?""Very little. None, really. He never discussed it at home.""He was, at one time, chief engineer of the Twentieth Century MotorCompany?"

"Yes. He had been employed by them for eighteen years."

"I wanted to ask Mr. Hastings about his work there and the reason why hegave it up. If you can tell me, I would like to know what happened in thatfactory."

The smile of sadness and humor appeared fully on Mrs. Hastings'

face. "That is what I would like to know myself," she said. "But I'mafraid I shall never learn it now. I know why he left the factory. It wasbecause of an outrageous scheme which the heirs of led Starnes establishedthere. He would not work on such terms or for such people.

But there was something else. I've always felt that something happened atTwentieth Century Motors, which he would not tell me."

"I'm extremely anxious to know any clue you may care to give me."

"I have no clue to it. I've tried to guess and given up. I cannotunderstand or explain it. But I know that something happened.

When my husband left Twentieth Century, we came here and he took a job ashead of the engineering department of Acme Motors. It was a growing,successful concern at the time. It gave my husband the kind of work he liked.He was not a person prone to inner conflicts, he had always been sure of hisactions and at peace with himself. But for a whole year after we leftWisconsin, he acted as if he were tortured by something, as if he werestruggling with a personal problem he could not solve. At the end of thatyear, he came to me one morning and told me that he had resigned from AcmeMotors, that he was retiring and would not work anywhere else. He loved hiswork; it was his whole life. Yet he looked calm, self-confident and happy,for the first time since we'd come here. He asked me not to question himabout the reason of his decision. I didn't question him and I didn't object.We had this house, we had our savings, we had enough to live on modestly forthe rest of our days. I never learned his reason. We went on living here,quietly and very happily. He seemed to feel a profound contentment. He had anodd serenity of spirit that I had never seen in him before. There was nothingstrange in his behavior or activity—except that at times, Very rarely, hewent out without telling me where he went or whom he saw. In the last twoyears of his life, he went away for one month, each summer; he did not tellme where. Otherwise, he lived as he always had. He studied a great deal andhe spent his time on engineering research of his own, working in the basementof our house. I don't know what he did with his notes and experimentalmodels. I found no trace of them in the basement, after his death.

He died five years ago, of a heart ailment from which he had suffered forsome time."

Dagny asked hopelessly, "Did you know the nature of his experiments?""No. I know very little about engineering."

"Did you know any of his professional friends or co-workers, who mighthave been acquainted with his research?"

"No. When he was at Twentieth Century Motors, he worked such long hoursthat we had very little time for ourselves and we spent it together. We hadno social life at all. He never brought his associates to the house."

"When he was at Twentieth Century, did he ever mention to you a motor hehad designed, an entirely new type of motor that could have changed thecourse of all industry?"

"A motor? Yes. Yes, he spoke of it several times. He said it was aninvention of incalculable importance. But it was not he who had designed it.It was the invention of a young assistant of his."

She saw the expression on Dagny's face, and added slowly, quizzically,without reproach, merely in sad amusement, "I see."

"Oh, I'm sorry!" said Dagny, realizing that her emotion had shot to herface and become a smile as obvious as a cry of relief.

"It's quite all right. I understand. It's the inventor of that motor thatyou're interested in. I don't know whether he is still alive, but at least Ihave no reason to think that he isn't."

"I'd give half my life to know that he is—and to find him. It's asimportant as that, Mrs. Hastings. Who is he?"

"I don't know. I don't know his name or anything about him. I never knewany of the men on my husband's staff. He told me only that he had a youngengineer who, some day, would up-turn the world.

My husband did not care for anything in people except ability. I thinkthis was the only man he ever loved. He didn't say so, but I could tell it,just by the way he spoke of this young assistant. I remember—the day he toldme that the motor was completed—how his voice sounded when he said, 'And he's

only twenty-six!' This was about a month before the death of Jed Starnes. Henever mentioned the motor or the young engineer, after that."

"You don't know what became of the young engineer?"

"No. "

"You can't suggest any way to find him?""No. "

"You have no clue, no lead to help me learn his name?""None. Tell me, was that motor extremely valuable?""More valuable than any estimate I could give you."

"It's strange, because, you see, I thought of it once, some years afterwe'd left Wisconsin, and I asked my husband what had become of that inventionhe'd said was so great, what would be done with it.

He looked at me very oddly and answered, 'Nothing.' "

"Why?"

"He wouldn't tell me."

"Can you remember anyone at all who worked at Twentieth Century? Anyonewho knew that young engineer? Any friend of his?"

"No, I . . . Wait! Wait, I think I can give you a lead. I can tell youwhere to find one friend of his. I don't even know that friend's name,either, but I know his address. It's an odd story. I'd better explain how ithappened. One evening—about two years after we'd come here—my husband wasgoing out and I needed our car that night, so he asked me to pick him upafter dinner at the restaurant of the railroad station. He did not tell mewith whom he was having dinner. When I drove up to the station, I saw himstanding outside the restaurant with two men. One of them was young and tall.The other was elderly; he looked very distinguished. I would still recognizethose men anywhere; they had the kind of faces one doesn't forget. My husbandsaw me and left them. They walked away toward the station platform; there wasa train coming. My husband pointed after the young man and said, 'Did you seehim? That's the boy I told you about.1 'The one who's the great maker ofmotors?' The one who was.' "

"And he told you nothing else?"

"Nothing else. This was nine years ago. Last spring, I went to visit mybrother who lives in Cheyenne. One afternoon, he took the family out for along drive. We went up into pretty wild country, high in the Rockies, and westopped at a roadside diner. There was a distinguished, gray-haired manbehind the counter. I kept staring at him while he fixed our sandwiches andcoffee, because I knew that I had seen his face before, but could notremember where. We drove on, we were miles away from the diner, when Iremembered. You'd better go there.

It's on Route 86, in the mountains, west of Cheyenne, near a smallindustrial settlement by the Lennox Copper Foundry. It seems strange, but I'mcertain of it: the cook in that diner is the man I saw at the railroadstation with my husband's young idol."

The diner stood on the summit of a long, hard climb. Its glass wallsspread a coat of polish over the view of rocks and pines descending in brokenledges to the sunset. It was dark below, but an even, glowing light stillremained in the diner, as in a small pool left behind by a receding tide.

Dagny sat at the end of the counter, eating a hamburger sandwich.

It was the best-cooked food she had ever tasted, the product of simpleingredients and of an unusual skill. Two workers were finishing their dinner;she was waiting for them to depart.

She studied the man behind the counter. He was slender and tall; he had anair of distinction that belonged in an ancient castle or in the inner officeof a bank; but his peculiar quality came from the fact that he made thedistinction seem appropriate here, behind the counter of a diner. He wore acook's white jacket as if it were a full-dress suit. There was an expert

competence in his manner of working; his movements were easy, intelligentlyeconomical. He had a lean face and gray hair that blended in tone with thecold blue of his eyes; somewhere beyond his look of courteous sternness,there was a note of humor, so faint that it vanished if one tried to discernit.

The two workers finished, paid and departed, each leaving a dime for atip. She watched the man as he removed their dishes, put the dimes into thepocket of his white jacket, wiped the counter, working with swift precision.Then he turned and looked at her. It was an impersonal glance, not intendedto invite conversation; but she felt certain that he had long since noted herNew York suit, her high-heeled pumps, her air of being a woman who did notwaste her time; his cold, observant eyes seemed to tell her that he knew shedid not belong here and that he was waiting to discover her purpose.

"How is business?" she asked.

"Pretty bad. They're going to close the Lennox Foundry next week, so I'llhave to close soon, too, and move on." His voice was clear, impersonallycordial.

"Where to?"

"1 haven't decided."

"What sort of thing do you have in mind?"

"I don't know. I'm thinking of opening a garage, if I can find the rightspot in some town."

"Oh no! You're too good at your job to change it. You shouldn't want to beanything but a cook."

A strange, fine smile moved the curve of his mouth. "No?" he askedcourteously.

"No! How would you like a job in New York?" He looked at her, astonished."I'm serious. I can give you a job on a big railroad, in charge of thedining-car department."

"May I ask why you should want to?"

She raised the hamburger sandwich in its white paper napkin."There's one of the reasons.""Thank you. What are the others?"

'T don't suppose you've lived in a big city, or you'd know how miserablydifficult it is to find any competent men for any job whatever.""I know a little about that."

"Well? How about it, then? Would you like a job in New York at tenthousand dollars a year?""No. "

She had been carried away by the joy of discovering and rewarding ability.She looked at him silently, shocked. "I don't think you understood me," shesaid.

"I did."

"You're refusing an opportunity of this kind?""Yes.""But why?"

"That is a personal matter."

"Why should you work like this, when you can have a better job?"

"I am not looking for a better job."

"You don't want a chance to rise and make money?"

"No. Why do you insist?"

"Because I hate to see ability being wasted!"He said slowly, intently, "So do I."

Something in the way he said it made her feel the bond of some profoundemotion which they held in common; it broke the discipline that forbade herever to call for help. "I'm so sick of them!" Her voice startled hen it was

an involuntary cry. "I'm so hungry for any sight of anyone who's able to dowhatever it is he's doing!"

She pressed the back of her hand to her eyes, trying to dam the outbreakof a despair she had not permitted herself to acknowledge; she had not knownthe extent of it, nor how little of her endurance the quest had left her.

"I'm sorry," he said, his voice low. It sounded, not as an apology, but asa statement of compassion.

She glanced up at him. He smiled, and she knew that the smile was intendedto break the bond which he, too, had felt: the smile had a trace of courteousmockery. He said, "But I don't believe that you came all the way from NewYork just to hunt for railroad cooks in the Rockies."

"No. I came for something else." She leaned forward, both forearms bracedfirmly against the counter, feeling calm and in tight control again, sensinga dangerous adversary. "Did you know, about ten years ago, a young engineerwho worked for the Twentieth Century Motor Company?"

She counted the seconds of a pause; she could not define the nature of theway he looked at her, except that it was the look of some specialattentiveness.

"Yes, I did," he answered.

"Could you give me his name and address?"

"What for?"

"It's crucially important that I find him.""That man? Of what importance is he?""He is the most important man in the world.""Really? Why?"

"Did you know anything about his work?""Yes."

"Did you know that he hit upon an idea of the most tremendousconsequence?"

He let a moment pass. "May I ask who you are?""Dagny Taggart. I'm the Vice-Pres—""Yes, Miss Taggart. I know who you are."

He said it with impersonal deference. But he looked as if he had found theanswer to some special question in his mind and was not astonished anylonger.

"Then you know that my interest is not idle," she said. "I'm in a positionto give him the chance he needs and I'm prepared to pay anything he asks.""May I ask what has aroused your interest in him?""His motor."

"How did you happen to know about his motor?"

"I found a broken remnant of it in the ruins of the Twentieth Centuryfactory. Not enough to reconstruct it or to learn how it worked, But enoughto know that it did work and that it's an invention which can save myrailroad, the country and the economy of the whole world.

Don't ask me to tell you now what trail I've followed, trying to tracethat motor and to find its inventor. That's not of any importance, even mylife and work are not of any importance to me right now, nothing is of anyimportance, except that I must find him. Don't ask me how I happened to cometo you. You're the end of the trail. Tell me his name."

He had listened without moving, looking straight at her; the attentivenessof his eyes seemed to take hold of every word and store it carefully away,giving her no clue to his purpose. He did not move for a long time. Then hesaid, "Give it up, Miss Taggart. You won't find him."

"What is his name?"

"I can tell you nothing about him."

"Is he still alive?"

"I can tell you nothing."

"What is your name?""Hugh Akston."

Through the blank seconds of recapturing her mind, she kept tellingherself: You're hysterical . . . don't be preposterous . . . it's just acoincidence of names—while she knew, in certainty and numb, inexplicableterror, that this was the Hugh Akston.

"Hugh Akston?" she stammered. "The philosopher? . . . The last of theadvocates of reason?"

"Why, yes," he answered pleasantly. "Or the first of their return."

He did not seem startled by her shock, but he seemed to find itunnecessary. His manner was simple, almost friendly, as if he felt no need tohide his identity and no resentment at its being discovered.

"I didn't think that any young person would recognize my name or attachany significance to it, nowadays," he said.

"But . . . but what are you doing here?" Her arm swept at the room. "Thisdoesn't make sense!"

"Are you sure?"

"What is it? A stunt? An experiment? A secret mission? Are you studyingsomething for some special purpose?"

"No, Miss Taggart. I'm earning my living." The words and the voice had thegenuine simplicity of truth, "Dr. Akston, I . . .it's inconceivable, it's .. . You're . . . you're a philosopher . . . the greatest philosopher living .. . an immortal name . . . why would you do this?"

"Because I am a philosopher, Miss Taggart."

She knew with certainty—even though she felt as if her capacity forcertainty and for understanding were gone—that she would obtain no help fromhim, that questions were useless, that he would give her no explanation,neither of the inventor's fate nor of his own.

"Give it up, Miss Taggart," he said quietly, as if giving proof that hecould guess her thoughts, as she had known he would. "It is a hopeless quest,the more hopeless because you have no inkling of what an impossible task youhave chosen to undertake. I would like to spare you the strain of trying todevise some argument, trick or plea that would make me give you theinformation you are seeking. Take my word for it: it can't be done. You saidI'm the end of your trail. It's a blind alley, Miss Taggart, Do not attemptto waste your money and effort on other, more conventional methods ofinquiry: do not hire detectives. They will learn nothing. You may choose toignore my warning, but I think that you are a person of high intelligence,able to know that I know what I am saying. Give it up. The secret you aretrying to solve involves something greater—much greater—than the invention ofa motor run by atmospheric electricity. There is only one helpful suggestionthat I can give you: By the essence and nature of existence, contradictionscannot exist. If you find it inconceivable that an invention of genius shouldbe abandoned among ruins, and that a philosopher should wish to work as acook in a diner—check your premises. You will find that one of them iswrong."

She started: she remembered that she had heard this before and that it wasFrancisco who had said it. And then she remembered that this man had been oneof Francisco's teachers.

"As you wish, Dr. Akston," she said. "I won't attempt to question youabout it. But would you permit me to ask you a question on an entirelydifferent subject?"

"Certainly."

"Dr. Robert Stadler once told me that when you were at the Patrick HenryUniversity, you had three students who were your favorites and his, threebrilliant minds from whom you expected a great future. One of them wasFrancisco d'Anconia."

"Yes. Another was Ragnar Danneskjold."

"Incidentally—this is not my question—who was the third?""His name would mean nothing to you. He is not famous."

"Dr. Stadler said that you and he were rivals over these three students,because you both regarded them as your sons.""Rivals? He lost them."

"Tell me, are you proud of the way these three have turned out?"

He looked off, into the distance, at the dying fire of the sunset on thefarthest rocks; his face had the look of a father who watches his sonsbleeding on a battlefield. He answered: "More proud than I had ever hoped tobe, "

It was almost dark. He turned sharply, took a package of cigarettes fromhis pocket, pulled out one cigarette, but stopped, remembering her presence,as if he had forgotten it for a moment, and extended the package to her. Shetook a cigarette and he struck the brief flare of a match, then shook it out,leaving only two small points of fire in the darkness of a glass room and ofmiles of mountains beyond it.

She rose, paid her bill, and said, "Thank you, Dr. Akston. I will notmolest you with tricks or pleas. I will not hire detectives. But I think Ishould tell you that I will not give up, I must find the inventor of thatmotor. I will find him."

"Not until the day when he chooses to find you—as he will."

When she walked to her car, he switched on the lights in the diner, shesaw the mailbox by the side of the road and noted the incredible fact thatthe name "Hugh Akston" stood written openly across it.

She had driven far down the winding road, and the lights of the diner werelong since out of sight, when she noticed that she was enjoying the taste ofthe cigarette he had given her: it was different from any she had ever smokedbefore. She held the small remnant to the light of the dashboard, looking forthe name of the brand. There was no name, only a trademark. Stamped in goldon the thin, white paper there stood the sign of the dollar.

She examined it curiously: she had never heard of that brand before.

Then she remembered the old man at the cigar stand of the TaggartTerminal, and smiled, thinking that this was a specimen for his collection.She stamped out the fire and dropped the butt into her handbag.

Train Number 57 was lined along the track, ready to leave for WyattJunction, when she reached Cheyenne, left her car at the garage where she hadrented it, and walked out on the platform of the Taggart station. She hadhalf an hour to wait for the eastbound main liner to New York. She walked tothe end of the platform and leaned wearily against a lamppost; she did notwant to be seen and recognized by the station employees, she did not want totalk to anyone, she needed rest. A few people stood in clusters on the half-deserted platform; animated conversations seemed to be going on, andnewspapers were more prominently in evidence than usual.

She looked at the lighted windows of Train Number 57—for a moment's reliefin the sight of a victorious achievement. Train Number 57 was about to startdown the track of the John Gait Line, through the towns, through the curvesof the mountains, past the green signals where people had stood cheering andthe valleys where rockets had risen to the summer sky. Twisted remnants ofleaves now hung on the branches beyond the train's roof line, and thepassengers wore furs and mufflers, as they climbed aboard. They moved withthe casual manner of a daily event, with the security of expecting aperformance long since taken for granted. . . . We've done it—she thought—this much, at least, is done.

It was the chance conversation of two men somewhere behind her that camebeating suddenly against her closed attention.

"But laws shouldn't be passed that way, so quickly."

"They're not laws, they're directives.""Then it's illegal."

"It's not illegal, because the Legislature passed a law last month givinghim the power to issue directives."

"I don't think directives should be sprung on people that way, out of theblue, like a punch in the nose."

"Well, there's no time to palaver when it's a national emergency."

"But I don't think it's right and it doesn't jibe. How is Rearden going todo it, when it says here—"

"Why should you worry about Rearden? He's rich enough. He can find a wayto do anything."

Then she leaped to the first newsstand in sight and seized a copy of theevening paper.

It was on the front page. Wesley Mouch, Top Co-ordinator of the Bureau ofEconomic Planning and National Resources, "in a surprise move," said thepaper, "and in the name of the national emergency,"

had issued a set of directives, which were strung in a column down thepage: The railroads of the country were ordered to reduce the maximum speedof all trains to sixty miles per hour—to reduce the maximum length of alltrains to sixty cars—and to run the same number of trains in every state of azone composed of five neighboring states, the country being divided into suchzones for the purpose.

The steel mills of the country were ordered to limit the maximumproduction of any metal alloy to an amount equal to the production of othermetal alloys by other mills placed in the same classification of plantcapacity—and to supply a fair share of any metal alloy to all consumers whomight desire to obtain it.

All the manufacturing establishments of the country, of any size andnature, were forbidden to move from their present locations, except whengranted a special permission to do so by the Bureau of Economic Planning andNational Resources.

To compensate the railroads of the country for the extra costs involvedand "to cushion the process of readjustment," a moratorium on payments ofinterest and principal on all railroad bonds—secured and unsecured,convertible and non-convertible—was declared for a period of five years.

To provide the funds for the personnel to enforce these directives, aspecial tax was imposed on the state of Colorado, "as the state best able toassist the needier states to bear the brunt of the national emergency," suchtax to consist of five per cent of the gross sales of Colorado's industrialconcerns.

The cry she uttered was one she had never permitted herself before,because she made it her pride always to answer it herself—but she saw a manstanding a few steps away, she did not see that he was a ragged bum, and sheuttered the cry because it was the plea of reason and he was a human figure:"What are we going to do?"

The bum grinned mirthlessly and shrugged: "Who is John Gait?"

It was not Taggart Transcontinental that stood as the focus of terror inher mind, it was not the thought of Hank Rearden tied to a rack pulled inopposite directions—it was Ellis Wyatt. Wiping out the rest, filling herconsciousness, leaving no room for words, no time for wonder, as a glaringanswer to the questions she had not begun to ask, stood two pictures: EllisWyatt's implacable figure in front of her desk, saying, "It is now in yourpower to destroy me; I may have to go; but if I go, I'll make sure that Itake all the rest of you along with me"—

and the circling violence of Ellis Wyatt's body when he flung a glass toshatter against the wall.

The only consciousness the pictures left her was the feeling of theapproach of some unthinkable disaster, and the feeling that she had to outrunit. She had to reach Ellis Wyatt and stop him. She did not know what it wasthat she had to prevent. She knew only that she had to stop him.

And because, were she lying crushed under the ruins of a building, wereshe torn by the bomb of an air raid, so long as she was still in existenceshe would know that action is man's foremost obligation, regardless ofanything he feels—she was able to run down the platform and to see the faceof the stationmaster when she found him—she was able to order: "Hold Number57 for me!"—then to run to the privacy of a telephone booth in the darknessbeyond the end of the platform, and to give the long-distance operator thenumber of Ellis Wyatt's house.

She stood, propped up by the walls of the booth, her eyes closed, andlistened to the dead whirl of metal which was the sound of a bell ringingsomewhere. It brought no answer. The bell kept coming in sudden spasms, likea drill going through her ear, through her body.

She clutched the receiver as if, unheeded, it were still a form ofcontact.

She wished the bell were louder. She forgot that the sound she heard wasnot the one ringing in his house. She did not know that she was screaming,"Ellis, don't! Don't! Don't I"—until she heard the cold, reproving voice ofthe operator say, "Your party does not answer."

She sat at the window of a coach of Train Number 57, and listened to theclicking of the wheels on the rails of Rearden Metal, She sat, unresisting,swaying with the motion of the train. The black luster of the window hid thecountryside she did not want to see. It was her second run on the John GaitLine, and she tried not to think of the first.

The bondholders, she thought, the bondholders of the John Gait Line—it wasto her honor that they had entrusted their money, the saving and achievementof years, it was on her ability that they had staked it, it was on her workthat they had relied and on their own—

and she had been made to betray them into a looters' trap: there would beno trains and no life-blood of freight, the John Gait Line had been only adrainpipe that had permitted Jim Taggart to make a deal and to drain theirwealth, unearned, into his pocket, in exchange for letting others drain hisrailroad—the bonds of the John Gait Line, which, this morning, had been theproud guardians of their owners' security and future, had become in the spaceof an hour, scraps of paper that no one would buy, with no value, no future,no power, save the power to close the doors and stop the wheels of the lasthope of the country—

and Taggart Transcontinental was not a living plant, fed by blood it hadworked to produce, but a cannibal of the moment, devouring the unbornchildren of greatness.

The tax on Colorado, she thought, the tax collected from Ellis Wyatt topay for the livelihood of those whose job was to tie him and make him unableto live, those who would stand on guard to see that he got no trains, no tankcars, no pipeline of Rearden Metal—Ellis Wyatt, stripped of the right ofserf-defense, left without voice, without weapons, and worse: made to be thetool of his own destruction, the supporter of his own destroyers, theprovider of their food and of their weapons—Ellis Wyatt being choked, withhis own bright energy turned against him as the noose—Ellis Wyatt, who hadwanted to tap an unlimited source of shale oil and who spoke of a SecondRenaissance. . . .

She sat bent over, her head on her arms, slumped at the, ledge of thewindow—while the great curves of the green-blue rail, the mountains, thevalleys, the new towns of Colorado went by in the darkness, unseen.

The sudden jolt of brakes on wheels threw her upright. It was anunscheduled stop, and the platform of the small station was crowded withpeople, all looking off in the same direction. The passengers around her werepressing to the windows, staring. She leaped to her feet, she ran down theaisle, down the steps, into the cold wind sweeping the platform.

In the instant before she saw it and her scream cut the voices of thecrowd, she knew that she had known that which she was to see. In a breakbetween mountains, lighting the sky, throwing a glow that swayed on the roofsand walls of the station, the hill of Wyatt Oil was a solid sheet of flame.

Later, when they told her that Ellis Wyatt had vanished, leaving nothingbehind but a board he had nailed to a post at the foot of the hill, when shelooked at his handwriting on the board, she felt as if she had almost knownthat these would be the words: "I am leaving it as I found it. Take over.It's yours."

PART IIEITHER-OR

CHAPTER ITHE MAN WHO BELONGED ON EARTH

Dr. Robert Stadler paced his office, wishing he would not feel the cold.Spring had been late in coming. Beyond the window, the dead gray of the hillslooked like the smeared transition from the soiled white of the sky to theleaden black of the river. Once in a while, a distant patch of hillsideflared into a silver-yellow that was almost green, then vanished. The cloudskept cracking for the width of a single sunray, then oozing closed again. Itwas not cold in the office, thought Dr. Stadler, it was that view that frozethe place.

It was not cold today, the chill was in his bones—he thought—the storedaccumulation of the winter months, when he had had to be distracted from hiswork by an awareness of such a matter as inadequate heating and people hadtalked about conserving fuel. It was preposterous, he thought, this growingintrusion of the accidents of nature into the affairs of men: it had nevermattered before, if a winter happened to be unusually severe; if a floodwashed out a section of railroad track, one did not spend two weeks eatingcanned vegetables; if an electric storm struck some power station, anestablishment such as the State Science Institute was not left withoutelectricity for five days. Five days of stillness this winter, he thought,with the great laboratory motors stopped and irretrievable hours wiped out,when his staff had been working on problems that involved the heart of theuniverse. He turned angrily away from the window—but stopped and turned backto it again. He did not want to see the book that lay on his desk.

He wished Dr. Ferris would come. He glanced at his watch: Dr.

Ferris was late—an astonishing matter—late for an appointment with him—Dr.Floyd Ferris, the valet of science, who had always faced him in a manner thatsuggested an apology for having but one hat to take off.

This was outrageous weather for the month of May, he thought, looking downat the river; it was certainly the weather that made him feel as he did, notthe book. He had placed the book in plain view on his desk, when he had notedthat his reluctance to see it was more than mere revulsion, that it containedthe element of an emotion never to be admitted. He told himself that he hadrisen from his desk, not because the book lay there, but merely because hehad wanted to move, feeling cold. He paced the room, trapped between the deskand the window. He would throw that book in the ash can where it belonged, hethought, just as soon as he had spoken to Dr. Ferris.

He watched the patch of green and sunlight on the distant hill, thepromise of spring in a world that looked as if no grass or bud would everfunction again. He smiled eagerly—and when the patch vanished, he felt a stabof humiliation, at his own eagerness, at the desperate way he had wanted tohold it. It reminded him of that interview with the eminent novelist, lastwinter. The novelist had come from Europe to write an article about him—andhe, who had once despised interviews, had talked eagerly, lengthily, toolengthily, seeing a promise of intelligence in the novelist's face, feeling acauseless, desperate need to be understood. The article had come out as acollection of sentences that gave him exorbitant praise and garbled everythought he had expressed. Closing the magazine, he had felt what he wasfeeling now at the desertion of a sunray.

All right—he thought, turning away from the window—he would concede thatattacks of loneliness had begun to strike him at times; but it was aloneliness to which he was entitled, it was hunger for the response of someliving, thinking mind. He was so tired of all those people, he thought incontemptuous bitterness; he dealt with cosmic rays, while they were unable todeal with an electric storm.

He felt the sudden contraction of his mouth, like a slap denying him theright to pursue this course of thought. He was looking at the book on hisdesk. Its glossy jacket was glaring and new; it had been published two weeksago. But I had nothing to do with it!—he screamed to himself; the screamseemed wasted on a merciless silence; nothing answered it, no echo offorgiveness. The title on the book's jacket was Why Do You Think You Think?

There was no sound in that courtroom silence within him, no pity, no voiceof defense—nothing but the paragraphs which his great memory had reprinted onhis brain: "Thought is a primitive superstition. Reason is an irrationalidea.

The childish notion that we are able to think has been mankind's costliesterror."

"What you think you think is an illusion created by your glands, youremotions and, in the last analysis, by the content of your stomach."

"That gray matter you're so proud of is like a mirror in an amusement parkwhich transmits to you nothing but distorted signals from a reality foreverbeyond your grasp."

"The more certain you feel of your rational conclusions, the more certainyou are to be wrong. Your brain being an instrument of distortion, the moreactive the brain the greater the distortion."

"The giants of the intellect, whom you admire so much, once taught youthat the earth was flat and that the atom was the smallest particle ofmatter. The entire history of science is a progression of exploded fallacies,not of achievements."

"The more we know, the more we learn that we know nothing."

"Only the crassest ignoramus can still hold to the old-fashioned notionthat seeing is believing. That which you see is the first thing todisbelieve."

"A scientist knows that a stone is not a stone at all. It is, in fact,identical with a feather pillow. Both are only a cloud formation of the sameinvisible, whirling particles. But, you say, you can't use a stone for apillow? Well, that merely proves your helplessness in the face of actualreality. "

"The latest scientific discoveries—such as the tremendous achievements ofDr. Robert Stadler—have demonstrated conclusively that our reason isincapable of dealing with the nature of the universe. These discoveries haveled scientists to contradictions which are impossible, according to the humanmind, but which exist in reality nonetheless.

If you have not yet heard it, my dear old-fashioned friends, it has nowbeen proved that the rational is the insane."

"Do not expect consistency. Everything is a contradiction of everythingelse. Nothing exists but contradictions."

"Do not look for 'common sense.' To demand 'sense' is the hallmark ofnonsense. Nature does not make sense. Nothing makes sense. The only crusadersfor 'sense' are the studious type of adolescent old maid who can't find a boyfriend, and the old-fashioned shopkeeper who thinks that the universe is assimple as his neat little inventory and beloved cash register."

"Let us break the chains of the prejudice called Logic. Are we going to bestopped by a syllogism?"

"So you think you're sure of your opinions? You cannot be sure ofanything. Are you going to endanger the harmony of your community, yourfellowship with your neighbors, your standing, reputation, good name andfinancial security—for the sake of an illusion? For the sake of the mirage ofthinking that you think? Are you going to run risks and court disasters—at aprecarious time like ours—by opposing the existing social order in the nameof those imaginary notions of yours which you call your convictions? You saythat you're sure you're right? Nobody is right, or ever can be. You feel that

the world around you is wrong? You have no means to know it. Everything iswrong in human eyes—so why fight it? Don't argue. Accept. Adjust yourself.Obey."

The book was written by Dr. Floyd Ferris and published by the StateScience Institute.

"I had nothing to do with it!" said Dr. Robert Stadler. He stood still bythe side of his desk, with the uncomfortable feeling of having missed somebeat of time, of not knowing how long the preceding moment had lasted. He hadpronounced the words aloud, in a tone of rancorous sarcasm directed atwhoever had made him say it.

He shrugged. Resting on the belief that self-mockery is an act of virtue,the shrug was the emotional equivalent of the sentence: You're RobertStadler, don't act like a high-school neurotic. He sat down at his desk andpushed the book aside with the back of his hand.

Dr. Floyd Ferris arrived half an hour late. "Sorry," he said, "but my carbroke down again on the way from Washington and I had a hell of a time tryingto find somebody to fix it—there's getting to be so damn few cars out on theroad that half the service stations are closed."

There was more annoyance than apology in his voice. He sat down withoutwaiting for an invitation to do so.

- Dr. Floyd Ferris would not have been noticed as particularly handsome inany other profession, but in the one he had chosen he was always described as"that good-looking scientist." He was six feet tall and forty-five years old,but he managed to look taller and younger.

He had an air of immaculate grooming and a ballroom grace of motion, buthis clothes were severe, his suits being usually black or midnight blue. Hehad a finely traced mustache, and his smooth black hair made the Instituteoffice boys say that he used the same shoe polish on both ends of him. He didnot mind repeating, in the tone of a joke on himself, that a movie produceronce said he would cast him for the part of a titled European gigolo. He hadbegun his career as a biologist, but that was forgotten long ago; he wasfamous as the Top Co-ordinator of the State Science Institute.

Dr. Stadler glanced at him with astonishment—the lack of apology wasunprecedented—and said dryly, "It seems to me that you are spending a greatdeal of your time in Washington."

"But, Dr. Stadler, wasn't it you who once paid me the compliment ofcalling me the watchdog of this Institute?" said Dr. Ferris pleasantly.

"Isn't that my most essential duty?"

"A few of your duties seem to be accumulating right around this place.Before I forget it, would you mind telling me what's going on here about thatoil shortage mess?"

He could not understand why Dr. Ferris' face tightened into an injuredlook, "You will permit me to say that this is unexpected and unwarranted,"said Dr. Ferris in that tone of formality which conceals pain and revealsmartyrdom. "None of the authorities involved have found cause for criticism.We have just submitted a detailed report on the progress of the work to dateto the Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources, and Mr. WesleyMouch has expressed himself as satisfied. We have done our best on thatproject. We have heard no one else describe it as a mess. Considering thedifficulties of the terrain, the hazards of the fire and the fact that it hasbeen only six months since we—"

"What are you talking about?" asked Dr. Stadler.

'The Wyatt Reclamation Project. Isn't that what you asked me?"

"No," said Dr. Stadler, "no, I . . . Wait a moment. Let me get thisstraight. I seem to recall something about this Institute taking charge of areclamation project. What is it that you're reclaiming?"

"Oil," said Dr. Ferris. "The Wyatt oil fields."

"That was a fire, wasn't it? In Colorado? That was . . . wait a moment . .. that was the man who set fire to his own oil wells."

"I'm inclined to believe that that's a rumor created by public hysteria,"said Dr. Ferris dryly. '"A rumor with some undesirable, unpatrioticimplications. I wouldn't put too much faith in those newspaper stories.Personally, I believe that it was an accident and that Ellis Wyatt perishedin the fire."

"Well, who owns those fields now?"

"Nobody—at the moment. There being no will or heirs, the government hastaken charge of operating the fields—as a measure of public necessity—forseven years. If Ellis Wyatt does not return within that time, he will beconsidered officially dead."

"Well, why did they come to you—to us, for such an unlikely assignment asoil pumping?"

"Because it is a problem of great technological difficulty, requiring theservices of the best scientific talent available. You see, it is a matter ofreconstructing the special method of oil extraction that Wyatt had employed.His equipment is still there, though in a dreadful condition; some of hisprocesses are known, but somehow there is no full record of the completeoperation or the basic principle involved. That is what we have torediscover."

"And how is it going?"

"The progress is most gratifying. We have just been granted a new andlarger appropriation. Mr. Wesley Mouch is pleased with our work.

So are Mr. Balch of the Emergency Commission, Mr. Anderson of CrucialSupplies and Mr. Pettibone of Consumers' Protection. I do not see what morecould be expected of us. The project is fully successful."

"Have you produced any oil?"

"No, but we have succeeded in forcing a flow from one of the wells, to theextent of six and a half gallons. This, of course, is merely of experimentalsignificance, but you must take into consideration the fact that we had tospend three full months just to put out the fire, which has now been totally—almost totally—extinguished. We have a much tougher problem than Wyatt everhad, because he started from scratch while we have to deal with thedisfigured wreckage of an act of vicious, anti-social sabotage which ... Imean to say, it is a difficult problem, but there is no doubt that we will beable to solve it."

"Well, what I really asked you about was the oil shortage here, in theInstitute. The level of temperature maintained in this building all winterwas outrageous. They told me that they had to conserve oil.

Surely you could have seen to it that the matter of keeping this placeadequately supplied with such things as oil was handled more efficiently."

"Oh, is that what you had in mind, Dr. Stadler? Oh, but I am so sorry!"The words came with a bright smile of relief on Dr. Ferris'

face; his solicitous manner returned. "Do you mean that the temperaturewas low enough to cause you discomfort?"

"I mean that I nearly froze to death."

"But that is unforgivable! Why didn't they tell me? Please accept mypersonal apology, Dr. Stadler, and rest assured that you will never beinconvenienced again. The only excuse I can offer for our maintenancedepartment is that the shortage of fuel was not due to their negligence, itwas—oh, I realize that you would not know about it and such matters shouldnot take up your invaluable attention—but, you see, the oil shortage lastwinter was a nation-wide crisis."

"Why? For heaven's sake, don't tell me that those Wyatt fields were theonly source of oil in the country!"

"No, no, but the sudden disappearance of a major supply wrought havoc inthe entire oil market. So the government had to assume control and impose oilrationing on the country, in order to protect the essential enterprises. Idid obtain an unusually large quota for the Institute—

and only by the special favor of some very special connections—but I feelabjectly guilty if this proved insufficient. Rest assured that it will nothappen again. It is only a temporary emergency. By next winter, we shall havethe Wyatt fields back in production, and conditions will return to normal.Besides, as far as this Institute is concerned, I made all the arrangementsto convert our furnaces to coal, and it was to be done next month, only theStockton Foundry in Colorado closed down suddenly, without notice—they werecasting parts for our furnaces, but Andrew Stockton retired, quiteunexpectedly, and now we have to wait till his nephew reopens the plant."

"I see. Well, I trust that you will take care of it among all your otheractivities." Dr. Stadler shrugged with annoyance. "It is becoming a littleridiculous—the number of technological ventures that an institution ofscience has to handle for the government."

"But, Dr. Stadler-"

"I know, I know, it can't be avoided. By the way, what is Project X?"

Dr. Ferris' eyes shot to him swiftly—an odd, bright glance of alertness,that seemed startled, but not frightened. "Where did you hear about ProjectX, Dr. Stadler?"

"Oh, I heard a couple of your younger boys saying something about it withan air of mystery you'd expect from amateur detectives. They told me it wassomething very secret."

"That's right, Dr. Stadler. It is an extremely secret research projectwhich the government has entrusted to us. And it is of utmost importance thatthe newspapers get no word about it."

"What's the X?"

"Xylophone. Project Xylophone. That is a code name, of course.

The work has to do with sound. But I am sure that it would not interestyou. It is a purely technological undertaking."

"Yes, do spare me the story. I have no time for your technologicalundertakings."

"May I suggest that it would be advisable to refrain from mentioning thewords 'Project X' to anyone, Dr. Stadler?"

"Oh, all right, all right. I must say I do not enjoy discussions of thatkind."

"But of course! And I wouldn't forgive myself if I allowed your time to betaken up by such concerns. Please feel certain that you may safely leave itto me." He made a movement to rise. "Now if this was the reason you wanted tosee me, please believe that I—"

"No," said Dr. Stadler slowly. "This was not the reason I wanted to seeyou. "

Dr. Ferris volunteered no questions, no eager offers of service; heremained seated, merely waiting.

Dr. Stadler reached over and made the book slide from the corner to thecenter of his desk, with a contemptuous flick of one hand. "Will you tell me,please," he asked, "what is this piece of indecency?"

Dr. Ferris did not glance at the book, but kept his eyes fixed onStadler's for an inexplicable moment; then he leaned back and said with anodd smile, "I feel honored that you chose to make such an exception for mysake as reading a popular book. This little piece has sold twenty thousandcopies in two weeks."

"I have read it."

"And?"

"I expect an explanation."

"Did you find the text confusing?"

Dr. Stadler looked at him in bewilderment. "Do you realize what theme youchose to treat and in what manner? The style alone, the style, the gutterkind of attitude—for a subject of this nature!"

"Do you think, then, that the content deserved a more dignified form ofpresentation?" The voice was so innocently smooth that Dr.

Stadler could not decide whether this was mockery.

"Do you realize what you're preaching in this book?"

"Since you do not seem to approve of it, Dr. Stadler, I'd rather have youthink that I wrote it innocently."

This was it, thought Dr. Stadler, this was the incomprehensible element inFerris' manner: he had supposed that an indication of his disapproval wouldbe sufficient, but Ferris seemed to remain untouched by it "If a drunken loutcould find the power to express himself on paper,"

said Dr. Stadler, "if he could give voice to his essence—the eternalsavage, leering his hatred of the mind—this is the sort of book I wouldexpect him to write. But to see it come from a scientist, under the imprintof this Institute!"

"But, Dr. Stadler, this book was not intended to be read by scientists. Itwas written for that drunken lout."

"What do you mean?"

"For the general public."

"But, good God! The feeblest imbecile should be able to see the glaringcontradictions in every one of your statements."

"Let us put it this way, Dr. Stadler: the man who doesn't see that,deserves to believe all my statements."

"But you've given the prestige of science to that unspeakable stuff!

It was all right for a disreputable mediocrity like Simon Pritchett todrool it as some sort of woozy mysticism—nobody listened to him. But you'vemade them think it's science. Science! You've taken the achievements of themind to destroy the mind. By what right did you use my work to make anunwarranted, preposterous switch into another field, pull an inapplicablemetaphor and draw a monstrous generalization out of what is merely amathematical problem? By what right did you make it sound as if I—I.'—gave mysanction to that book?"

Dr. Ferris did nothing, he merely looked at Dr. Stadler calmly; but thecalm gave him an air that was almost patronizing. "Now, you see, Dr. Stadler,you're speaking as if this book were addressed to a thinking audience. If itwere, one would have to be concerned with such matters as accuracy, validity,logic and the prestige of science. But it isn't. It's addressed to thepublic. And you have always been first to believe that the public does notthink." He paused, but Dr, Stadler said nothing.

"This book may have no philosophical value whatever, but it has a greatpsychological value."

"Just what is that?"

"You see, Dr. Stadler, people don't want to think. And the deeper they getinto trouble, the less they want to think. But by some sort of instinct, theyfeel that they ought to and it makes them feel guilty. So they'll bless andfollow anyone who gives them a justification for not thinking. Anyone whomakes a virtue—a highly intellectual virtue-out of what they know to be their sin, their weakness and their guilt.""And you propose to pander to that?""That is the road to popularity.""Why should you seek popularity?"

Dr. Ferris' eyes moved casually to Dr. Stadler's face, as if by pureaccident. "We are a public institution," he answered evenly, "supported bypublic funds."

"So you tell people that science is a futile fraud which ought to beabolished!"

"That is a conclusion which could be drawn, in logic, from my book.But that is not the conclusion they will draw."

"And what about the disgrace to the Institute in the eyes of the men ofintelligence, wherever such may be left?""Why should we worry about them?"

Dr. Stadler could have regarded the sentence as conceivable, had it beenuttered with hatred, envy or malice; but the absence of any such emotion, thecasual ease of the voice, an ease suggesting a chuckle, hit him like amoment's glimpse of a realm that could not be taken as part of reality; thething spreading down to his stomach was cold terror.

"Did you observe the reactions to my book, Dr. Stadler? It was receivedwith considerable favor."

"Yes—and that is what I find impossible to believe." He had to speak, hehad to speak as if this were a civilized discussion, he could not allowhimself time to know what it was he had felt for a moment.

"I am unable to understand the attention you received in all the reputableacademic magazines and how they could permit themselves to discuss your bookseriously. If Hugh Akston were around, no academic publication would havedared to treat this as a work admissible into the realm of philosophy."

"He is not around."

Dr. Stadler felt that there were words which he was now called upon topronounce—and he wished he could end this conversation before he discoveredwhat they were.

"On the other hand," said Dr, Ferris, "the ads for my book—oh, I'm sureyou wouldn't notice such things as ads—quote a letter of high praise which Ireceived from Mr. Wesley Mouch."

"Who the hell is Mr. Wesley Mouch?"

Dr. Ferris smiled. "In another year, even you won't ask that question, Dr.Stadler. Let us put it this way: Mr. Mouch is the man who is rationing oil—for the time being."

"Then I suggest that you stick to your job. Deal with Mr. Mouch and leavehim the realm of oil furnaces, but leave the realm of ideas to me."

"It would be curious to try to formulate the line of demarcation,"

said Dr. Ferris, in the tone of an idle academic remark. "But if we'retalking about my book, why, then we're talking about the realm of publicrelations." He turned to point solicitously at the mathematical formulaschalked on the blackboard. "Dr. Stadler, it would be disastrous if youallowed the realm of public relations to distract you from the work which youalone on earth are capable of doing."

It was said with obsequious deference, and Dr. Stadler could not tell whatmade him hear in it the sentence: "Stick to your blackboard!"

He felt a biting irritation and he switched it against himself, thinkingangrily that he had to get rid of these suspicions.

"Public relations?" he said contemptuously. "I don't see any practicalpurpose in your book. I don't see what it's intended to accomplish."

"Don't you?" Dr. Ferrisl eyes flickered briefly to his face; the sparkleof insolence was too swift to be identified with certainty.

"I cannot permit myself to consider certain things as possible in acivilized society," Dr. Stadler said sternly.

"That is admirably exact," said Dr. Ferris cheerfully. "You cannot permityourself."

Dr. Ferris rose, being first to indicate that the interview was ended.

"Please call for me whenever anything occurs in this Institute to causeyou discomfort, Dr. Stadler," he said. "It is my privilege always to be atyour service."

Knowing that he had to assert his authority, smothering the shamefulrealization of the sort of substitute he was choosing, Dr. Stadler saidimperiously, in a tone of sarcastic rudeness, "The next time I call for you,you'd better do something about that car of yours."

"Yes, Dr. Stadler. I shall make certain never to be late again, and I begyou to forgive me." Dr. Ferris responded as if playing a part on cue; as ifhe were pleased that Dr. Stadler had learned, at last, the modern method ofcommunication. "My car has been causing me a great deal of trouble, it'sfalling to pieces, and I had ordered a new one sometime ago, the best one onthe market, a Hammond convertible—

but Lawrence Hammond went out of business last week, without reason orwarning, so now I'm stuck. Those bastards seem to be vanishing somewhere.Something will have to be done about it."

When Ferris had gone, Dr. Stadler sat at his desk, his shoulders shrinkingtogether, conscious only of a desperate wish not to be seen by anyone. In thefog of the pain which he would not define, there was also the desperatefeeling that no one—no one of those he valued—

would ever wish to see him again.

He knew the words which he had not uttered. He had not said that he woulddenounce the book in public and repudiate it in the name of the Institute. Hehad not said it, because he had been afraid to discover that the threat wouldleave Ferris unmoved, that Ferris was safe, that the word of Dr. RobertStadler had no power any longer. And while he told himself that he wouldconsider later the question of making a public protest, he knew that he wouldnot make it.

He picked up the book and let it drop into the wastebasket.

A face came to his mind, suddenly and clearly, as if he were seeing thepurity of its every line, a young face he had not permitted himself to recallfor years. He thought: No, he has not read this book, he won't see it, he'sdead, he must have died long ago. . . . The sharp pain was the shock ofdiscovering simultaneously that this was the man he longed to see more thanany other being in the world—and that he had to hope that this man was dead.

He did not know why—when the telephone rang and his secretary told himthat Miss Dagny Taggart was on the line—why he seized the receiver witheagerness and noticed that his hand was trembling. She would never want tosee him again, he had thought for over a year. He heard her clear, impersonalvoice asking for an appointment to see him.

"Yes, Miss Taggart, certainly, yes, indeed. . . . Monday morning?

Yes—look, Miss Taggart, I have an engagement in New York today, I coulddrop in at your office this afternoon, if you wish. . . . No, no —no troubleat all, I'll be delighted. . . . This afternoon, Miss Taggart, about two—Imean, about four o'clock."

He had no engagement in New York. He did not give himself time to knowwhat had prompted him to do it. He was smiling eagerly, looking at a patch ofsunlight on a distant hill.

Dagny drew a black line across Train Number 93 on the schedule, and felt amoment's desolate satisfaction in noting that she did it calmly. It was anaction which she had had to perform many times in the last six months. It hadbeen hard, at first; it was becoming easier.

The day would come, she thought, when she would be able to deliver thatdeath stroke even without the small salute of an effort. Train Number 93 wasa freight that had earned its living by carrying supplies to Hammondsville,Colorado.

She knew what steps would come next: first, the death of the specialfreights—then the shrinking in the number of boxcars for Hammondsville,attached, like poor relatives, to the rear end of freights bound for othertowns—then the gradual cutting of the stops at Hammondsville Station from the

schedules of the passenger trains—then the day when she would strikeHammondsville, Colorado, off the map. That had been the progression of WyattJunction and of the town called Stockton.

She knew—once word was received that Lawrence Hammond had retired—that itwas useless to wait, to hope and to wonder whether his cousin, his lawyer ora committee of local citizens would reopen the plant. She knew it was time tostart cutting the schedules.

It had lasted less than six months after Ellis Wyatt had gone—that periodwhich a columnist had gleefully called "the field day of the little fellow."Every oil operator in the country, who owned three wells and whined thatEllis Wyatt left him no chance of livelihood, had rushed to fill the holewhich Wyatt had left wide open. They formed leagues, cooperatives,associations; they pooled their resources and their letter heads, "The littlefellow's day in the sun," the columnist had said. Their sun had been theflames that twisted through the derricks of Wyatt Oil. In its glare, theymade the kind of fortunes they had dreamed about, fortunes requiring nocompetence or effort. Then their biggest customers, such as power companies,who drank oil by the trainful and would make no allowances for human frailty,began to convert to coal —and the smaller customers, who were more tolerant,began to go out of business—the boys in Washington imposed rationing on oiland an emergency tax on employers to support the unemployed oil fieldworkers—then a few of the big oil companies closed down—then the littlefellows in the sun discovered that a drilling bit which had cost a hundreddollars, now cost them five hundred, there being no market for oil fieldequipment, and the suppliers having to earn on one drill what they had earnedon five, or perish—then the pipe lines began to close, there being no oneable to pay for their upkeep—then the railroads were granted permission toraise their freight rates, there being little oil to carry and the cost ofrunning tank trains having crushed two small lines out of existence—and whenthe sun went down, they saw that the operating costs, which had oncepermitted them to exist on their sixty-acre fields, had been made possible bythe miles of Wyatt's hillside and had gone in the same coils of smoke. Notuntil their fortunes had vanished and their pumps had stopped, did the littlefellows realize that no business in the country could afford to buy oil atthe price it would now take them to produce it. Then the boys in Washingtongranted subsidies to the oil operators, but not all of the oil operators hadfriends in Washington, and there followed a situation which no one cared toexamine too closely or to discuss.

Andrew Stockton had been in the sort of position which most of thebusinessmen envied. The rush to convert to coal had descended upon hisshoulders like a weight of gold: he had kept his plant working around theclock, running a race with next winter's blizzards, casting parts for coal-burning stoves and furnaces. There were not many dependable foundries left;he had become one of the main pillars supporting the cellars and kitchens ofthe country. The pillar collapsed without warning. Andrew Stockton announcedthat lie was retiring, closed his plant and vanished. He left no word on whathe wished to be done with the plant or whether his relatives had the right toreopen it.

There still were cars on the roads of the country, but they moved liketravelers in the desert, who ride past the warning skeletons of horsesbleached by the sun: they moved past the skeletons of cars that had collapsedon duty and had been left in the ditches by the side of the road. People werenot buying cars any longer, and the automobile factories were closing. Butthere were men still able to get oil, by means of friendships that nobodycared to question. These men bought cars at any price demanded. Lightsflooded the mountains of Colorado from the great windows of the plant, wherethe assembly belts of Lawrence Hammond poured trucks and cars to the sidings

of Taggart Transcontinental. The word that Lawrence Hammond had retired camewhen least expected, brief and sudden like the single stroke of a bell in aheavy stillness. A committee of local citizens was now broadcasting appealson the radio, begging Lawrence Hammond, wherever he was, to give thempermission to reopen his plant. There was no answer.

She had screamed when Ellis Wyatt went; she had gasped when AndrewStockton retired; when she heard that Lawrence Hammond had quit, she askedimpassively, "Who's next?"

"No, Miss Taggart, I can't explain it," the sister of Andrew Stockton hadtold her on her last trip to Colorado, two months ago. "He never said a wordto me and I don't even know whether he's dead or living, same as Ellis Wyatt.No, nothing special had happened the day before he quit. I remember only thatsome man came to see him on that last evening. A stranger I'd never seenbefore. They talked late into the night—when I went to sleep, the light wasstill burning in Andrew's study."

People were silent in the towns of Colorado. Dagny had seen the way theywalked in the streets, past their small drugstores, hardware stores andgrocery markets: as if they hoped that the motions of their jobs would savethem from looking ahead at the future. She, too, had walked through thosestreets, trying not to lift her head, not to see the ledges of sooted rockand twisted steel, which had been the Wyatt oil fields. They could be seenfrom many of the towns; when she had looked ahead, she had seen them in thedistance.

One well, on the crest of the hill, was still burning. Nobody had beenable to extinguish it. She had seen it from the streets: a spurt of firetwisting convulsively against the sky, as if trying to tear loose. She hadseen it at night, across the distance of a hundred clear, black miles, fromthe window of a train: a small, violent flame, waving in the wind.

People called it Wyatt's Torch.

The longest train on the John Gait Line had forty cars; the fastest ran atfifty miles an hour. The engines had to be spared: they were coal burningengines, long past their age of retirement. Jim obtained the oil for theDiesels that pulled the Comet and a few of their transcontinental freights.The only source of fuel she could count on and deal with was Ken Danagger ofDanagger Coal in Pennsylvania.

Empty trains clattered through the four states that were tied, asneighbors, to the throat of Colorado. They carried a few carloads of sheep,some corn, some melons and an occasional farmer with an overdressed family,who had friends in Washington. Jim had obtained a subsidy from Washington forevery train that was run, not as a profit making carrier, but as a service of"public equality."

It took every scrap of her energy to keep trains running through thesections where they were still needed, in the areas that were stillproducing. But on the balance sheets of Taggart Transcontinental, the checksof Jim's subsidies for empty trains bore larger figures than the profitbrought by the best freight train of the busiest industrial division.

Jim boasted that this had been the most prosperous six months in Taggarthistory. Listed as profit, on the glossy pages of his report to thestockholders, was the money he had not earned—the subsidies for empty trains;and the money he did not own—the sums that should have gone to pay theinterest and the retirement of Taggart bonds, the debt which, by the will ofWesley Mouch, he had been permitted not to pay. He boasted about the greatervolume of freight carried by Taggart trains in Arizona—where Dan Conway hadclosed the last of the Phoenix-Durango and retired; and in Minnesota—wherePaul Larkin was shipping iron ore by rail, and the last of the ore boats onthe Great Lakes had gone out of existence.

"You have always considered money-making as such an important virtue," Jimhad said to her with an odd half-smile. "Well, it seems to me that I'm betterat it than you are."

Nobody professed to understand the question of the frozen railroad bonds;perhaps, because everybody understood it too well. At first, there had beensigns of a panic among the bondholders and of a dangerous indignation amongthe public. Then, Wesley Mouch had issued another directive, which ruled thatpeople could get their bonds "defrozen" upon a plea of "essential need": thegovernment would purchase the bonds, if it found the proof of the needsatisfactory. There were three questions that no one answered or asked: "Whatconstituted proof?" "What constituted need?" "Essential—to whom?"

Then it became bad manners to discuss why one man received the grantdefreezing his money, while another had been refused. People turned away inmouth-pinched silence, if anybody asked a "why?" One was supposed todescribe, not to explain, to catalogue facts, not to evaluate them: Mr. Smithhad been defrozen, Mr. Jones had not; that was all. And when Mr. Jonescommitted suicide, people said, "Well, I don't know, if he'd really neededhis money, the government would have given it to him, but some men arc justgreedy."

One was not supposed to speak about the men who, having been refused, soldtheir bonds for one-third of the value to other men who possessed needswhich, miraculously, made thirty-three frozen cents melt into a whole dollar;or about a new profession practiced by bright young boys just out of college,who called themselves "defreezers" and offered their services "to help youdraft your application in the proper modern terms." The boys had friends inWashington, Looking at the Taggart rail from the platform of some countrystation, she had found herself feeling, not the brilliant pride she had oncefelt, but a foggy, guilty shame, as if some foul kind of rust had grown onthe metal, and worse: as if the rust had a tinge of blood. But then, in theconcourse of the Terminal, she looked at the statue of Nat Taggart andthought: It was your rail, you made it, you fought for it, you were notstopped by fear or by loathing—I won't surrender it to the men of blood andrust—and I'm the only one left to guard it.

She had not given up her quest for the man who invented the motor.

It was the only part of her work that made her able to bear the rest.

It was the only goal in sight that gave meaning to her struggle. Therewere times when she wondered why she wanted to rebuild that motor.

What for?—some voice seemed to ask her. Because I'm still alive, sheanswered. But her quest had remained futile. Her two engineers had foundnothing in Wisconsin. She had sent them to search through the country for menwho had worked for Twentieth Century, to learn the name of the inventor. Theyhad learned nothing. She had sent them to search through the files of thePatent Office; no patent for the motor had ever been registered.

The only remnant of her personal quest was the stub of the cigarette withthe dollar sign. She had forgotten it, until a recent evening, when she hadfound it in a drawer of her desk and given it to her friend at the cigarcounter of the concourse. The old man had been very astonished, as heexamined the stub, holding it cautiously between two fingers; he had neverheard of such a brand and wondered how he could have missed it. "Was it ofgood quality, Miss Taggart?" "The best I've ever smoked." He had shaken hishead, puzzled. He had promised to discover where those cigarettes were madeand to get her a carton.

She had tried to find a scientist able to attempt the reconstruction ofthe motor. She had interviewed the men recommended to her as the best intheir field. The first one, after studying the remnants of the motor and ofthe manuscript, had declared, in the tone of a drill sergeant, that the thingcould not work, had never worked and he would prove that no.

such motor could ever be made to work. The second one had drawled,, in thetone of an answer to a boring imposition, that he did not know whether itcould be done or not and did not care to find out. The third had said, hisvoice belligerently insolent, that he would attempt the task on a ten-yearcontract at twenty-five thousand dollars a year—"After all, Miss Taggart, ifyou expect to make huge profits on that motor, it's you who should pay forthe gamble of my time." The fourth, who was the youngest, had looked at hersilently for a moment and the lines of his face had slithered from blanknessinto a suggestion of contempt.

"You know, Miss Taggart, I don't think that such a motor should ever bemade, even if somebody did learn how to make it. It would be so superior toanything we've got that it would be unfair to lesser scientists, because itwould leave no field for their achievements and abilities. I don't think thatthe strong should have the right to wound the self esteem of the weak." Shehad ordered him out of her office, and had sat in incredulous horror beforethe fact that the most vicious statement she had ever heard had been utteredin a tone of moral righteousness.

The decision to speak to Dr. Robert Stadler had been her last recourse.

She had forced herself to call him, against the resistance of someimmovable point within her that felt like brakes slammed tight. She hadargued against herself. She had thought: I deal with men like Jim and OrrenBoyle—his guilt is less than theirs—why can't I speak to him?

She had found no answer, only a stubborn sense of reluctance, only thefeeling that of all the men on earth, Dr. Robert Stadler was the one she mustnot call.

As she sat at her desk, over the schedules of the John Gait Line, waitingfor Dr. Stadler to come, she wondered why no first-rate talent had risen inthe field of science for years. She was unable to look for an answer. She waslooking at the black line which was the corpse of Train Number 93 on theschedule before her.

A train has the two great attributes of life, she thought, motion andpurpose; this had been like a living entity, but now it was only a number ofdead freight cars and engines. Don't give yourself time to fee], she thought,dismember the carcass as fast as possible, the engines are needed all overthe system, Ken Danagger in Pennsylvania needs trains, more trains, if only—

"Dr. Robert Stadler," said the voice of the interoffice communicator onher desk.

He came in, smiling; the smile seemed to underscore his words: "MissTaggart, would you care to believe how helplessly glad I am to see youagain?"

She did not smile, she looked gravely courteous as she answered, "It wasvery kind of you to come here." She bowed, her slender figure standing tautlystraight but for the slow, formal movement of her head.

"What if I confessed that all I needed was some plausible excuse in orderto come? Would it astonish you?"

"I would try not to overtax your courtesy." She did not smile. "Please sitdown, Dr. Stadler,"

He looked brightly around him. "I've never seen the office of a railroadexecutive. I didn't know it would be so . . .so solemn a place. Is that inthe nature of the job?"

"The matter on which I'd like to ask your advice is far removed from thefield of your interests, Dr. Stadler. You may think it odd that I should callon you. Please allow me to explain my reason."

"The fact that you wished to call on me is a fully sufficient reason. If Ican be of any service to you, any service whatever, I don't know what wouldplease me more at this moment." His smile had an attractive quality, the

smile of a man of the world who used it, not to cover his words, but tostress the audacity of expressing a sincere emotion.

"My problem is a matter of technology," she said, in the clear,expressionless tone of a young mechanic discussing a difficult assignment.

"I fully realize your contempt for that branch of science. I do not expectyou to solve my problem—it is not the kind of work which you do or careabout. I should like only to submit the problem to you, and then I'll havejust two questions to ask you. I had to call on you, because it is a matterthat involves someone's mind, a very great mind, and"—she spoke impersonally,in the manner of rendering exact justice—"and you are the only great mindleft in this field."

She could not tell why her words bit him as they did. She saw thestillness of his face, the sudden earnestness of the eyes, a strangeearnestness that seemed eager and almost pleading, then she heard his voicecome gravely, as if from under the pressure of some emotion that made itsound simple and humble: "What is your problem, Miss Taggart?"

She told him about the motor and the place where she had found it; shetold him that it had proved impossible to learn the name of the inventor; shedid not mention the details of her quest. She handed him photographs of themotor and the remnant of the manuscript.

She watched him as he read. She saw the professional assurance in theswift, scanning motion of his eyes, at first, then the pause, then thegrowing intentness, then a movement of his lips which, from another man,would have been a whistle or a gasp. She saw him stop for long minutes andlook off, as if his mind were racing over countless sudden trails, trying tofollow them all—she saw him leaf back through the pages, then stop, thenforce himself to read on, as if he were torn between his eagerness tocontinue and his eagerness to seize all the possibilities breaking openbefore his vision. She saw his silent excitement, she knew that he hadforgotten her office, her existence, everything but the sight of anachievement—and in tribute to his being capable of such reaction, she wishedit were possible for her to like Dr. Robert Stadler.

They had been silent for over an hour, when he finished and looked up ather. "But this is extraordinary!" he said in the joyous, astonished tone ofannouncing some news she had not expected.

She wished she could smile in answer and grant him the comradeship of ajoy celebrated together, but she merely nodded and said coldly, "Yes."

"But, Miss Taggart, this is tremendous!"

"Yes."

"Did you say it's a matter of technology? It's more, much, much more thanthat. The pages where he writes about his converter—you can see what premisehe's speaking from. He arrived at some new concept of energy. He discardedall our standard assumptions, according to which his motor would have beenimpossible. He formulated a new premise of his own and he solved the secretof converting static energy into kinetic power. Do you know what that means?Do you realize what a feat of pure, abstract science he had to perform beforehe could make his motor?"

"Who?" she asked quietly.

"I beg your pardon?"

"That was the first of the two questions I wanted to ask you, Dr.

Stadler: can you think of any young scientist you might have known tenyears ago, who would have been able to do this?"

He paused, astonished; he had not had time to wonder about that question."No," he said slowly, frowning, "no, I can't think of anyone.

. . . And that's odd . . . because an ability of this kind couldn't havepassed unnoticed anywhere . . . somebody would have called him to myattention . . . they always sent promising young physicists to me.

. . . Did you say you found this in the research laboratory of a plain,commercial motor factory?""Yes."

"That's odd. What was he doing in such a place?""Designing a motor."

"That's what I mean. A man with the genius of a great scientist, who choseto be a commercial inventor? I find it outrageous. He wanted a motor, and hequietly performed a major revolution in the science of energy, just as ameans to an end, and he didn't bother to publish his findings, but went righton making his motor. Why did he want to waste his mind on practicalappliances?"

"Perhaps because he liked living on this earth," she said involuntarily."I beg your pardon?"

"No, I . . .I'm sorry, Dr. Stadler. I did not intend to discuss any . . .irrelevant subject."

He was looking off, pursuing his own course of thought, "Why didn't hecome to me? Why wasn't he in some great scientific establishment where hebelonged? If he had the brains to achieve this, surely he had the brains toknow the importance of what he had done. Why didn't he publish a paper on hisdefinition of energy? I can see the general direction he'd taken, but Goddamn him!—the most important pages are missing, the statement isn't here!Surely somebody around him should have known enough to announce his work tothe whole world of science. Why didn't they? How could they abandon, justabandon, a thing of this kind?"

"These are the questions to which I found no answers."

"And besides, from the purely practical aspect, why was that motor left ina junk pile? You'd think any greedy fool of an industrialist would havegrabbed it in order to make a fortune. No intelligence was needed to see itscommercial value."

She smiled for the first time—a smile ugly with bitterness; she saidnothing.

"You found it impossible to trace the inventor?" he asked.

"Completely impossible—so far."

"Do you think that he is still alive?"

"I have reason to think that he is. But I can't be sure.""Suppose I tried to advertise for him?""No. Don't."

"But if I were to place ads in scientific publications and have Dr.

Ferris"—he stopped; he saw her glance at him as swiftly as he glanced ather; she said nothing, but she held his glance; he looked away and finishedthe sentence coldly and firmly—"and have Dr. Ferris broadcast on the radiothat I wish to see him, would he refuse to come?"

"Yes, Dr. Stadler, I think he would refuse."

He was not looking at her. She saw the faint tightening of his facialmuscles and, simultaneously, the look of something going slack in the linesof his face; she could not tell what sort of light was dying within him norwhat made her think of the death of a light.

He tossed the manuscript down on the desk with a casual, contemptuousmovement of his wrist. 'Those men who do not mind being practical enough tosell their brains for money, ought to acquire a little knowledge of theconditions of practical reality."

He looked at her with a touch of defiance, as if waiting for an angryanswer. But her answer was worse than anger: her face remainedexpressionless, as if the truth or falsehood of his convictions were of noconcern to her any longer. She said politely, "The second question I wantedto ask you was whether you would be kind enough to tell me the name of any

physicist you know who, in your judgment, would possess the ability toattempt the reconstruction of this motor."

He looked at her and chuckled; it was a sound of pain. "Have you beentortured by it, too, Miss Taggart? By the impossibility of finding any sortof intelligence anywhere?"

"I have interviewed some physicists who were highly recommended to me andI have found them to be hopeless."

He leaned forward eagerly. "Miss Taggart," he asked, "did you call on mebecause you trusted the integrity of my scientific judgment?"

The question was a naked plea.

"Yes," she answered evenly, "I trusted the integrity of your scientificjudgment."

He leaned back; he looked as if some hidden smile were smoothing thetension away from his face. "I wish I could help you," he said, as to acomrade. "I most selfishly wish I could help you, because, you see, this hasbeen my hardest problem—trying to find men of talent for my own staff.Talent, hell! I'd be satisfied with just a semblance of promise —but the menthey send me couldn't be honestly said to possess the potentiality ofdeveloping into decent garage mechanics. I don't know whether I am gettingolder and more demanding, or whether the human race is degenerating, but theworld didn't seem to be so barren of intelligence in my youth. Today, if yousaw the kind of men I've had to interview, you'd—"

He stopped abruptly, as if at a sudden recollection. He remained silent;he seemed to be considering something he knew, but did not wish to tell her;she became certain of it, when he concluded brusquely, in that tone ofresentment which conceals an evasion, "No, I don't know anyone I'd care torecommend to you."

"This was all I wanted to ask you, Dr. Stadler," she said. "Thank you forgiving me your time."

He sat silently still for a moment, as if he could not bring himself toleave.

"Miss Taggart," he asked, "could you show me the actual motor itself?"

She looked at him, astonished. "Why, yes ... if you wish. But it's in anunderground vault, down in our Terminal tunnels."

"I don't mind, if you wouldn't mind taking me down there. I have nospecial motive. It's only my personal curiosity. I would like to see it—

that's all."

When they stood in the granite vault, over a glass case containing a shapeof broken metal, he took off his hat with a slow, absent movement—and shecould not tell whether it was the routine gesture of remembering that he wasin a room with a lady, or the gesture of baring one's head over a coffin.

They stood in silence, in the glare of a single light refracted from theglass surface to their faces. Train wheels were clicking in the distance, andit seemed at times as if a sudden, sharper jolt of vibration were about toawaken an answer from the corpse in the glass case.

"It's so wonderful," said Dr. Stadler, his voice low. "It's so wonderfulto see a great, new, crucial idea which is not mine!"

She looked at him, wishing she could believe that she understood himcorrectly. He spoke, in passionate sincerity, discarding convention,discarding concern for whether it was proper to let her hear the confessionof his pain, seeing nothing but the face of a woman who was able tounderstand: "Miss Taggart, do you know the hallmark of the second-rater? It'sresentment of another man's achievement. Those touchy mediocrities who sittrembling lest someone's work prove greater than their own—they have noinkling of the loneliness that comes when you reach the top. The lonelinessfor an equal— for a mind to respect and an achievement to admire. They baretheir teeth at you from out of their rat holes, thinking that you take

pleasure in letting your brilliance dim them—while you'd give a year of yourlife to see a flicker of talent anywhere among them. They envy achievement,and their dream of greatness is a world where all men have become theiracknowledged inferiors. They don't know that that dream is the infallibleproof of mediocrity., because that sort of world is what the man ofachievement would not be able to bear. They have no way of knowing what hefeels when surrounded by inferiors—hatred? no, not hatred, but boredom theterrible, hopeless, draining, paralyzing boredom. Of what account are praiseand adulation from men whom you don't respect? Have you ever felt the longingfor someone you could admire? For something, not to look down at, but up to?"

"I've felt it all my life," she said. It was an answer she could notrefuse him.

"I know," he said—and there was beauty in the impersonal gentleness of hisvoice. "I knew it the first time I spoke to you. That was why I came today—"He stopped for the briefest instant, but she did not answer the appeal and hefinished with the same quiet gentleness, "Well, that was why I wanted to seethe motor."

"I understand, " she said softly; the tone of her voice was the only formof acknowledgment she could grant him.

"Miss Taggart, " he said, his eyes lowered, looking at the glass case, "Iknow a man who might be able to undertake the reconstruction of that motor.He would not work for me—so he is probably the kind of man you want."

But by the time he raised his head—and before he saw the look ofadmiration in her eyes, the open look he had begged for, the look offorgiveness—he destroyed his single moment's atonement by adding in a voiceof drawing-room sarcasm, "Apparently, the young man had no desire to work forthe good of society or the welfare of science. He told me that he would nottake a government job. I presume he wanted the bigger salary he could hope toobtain from a private employer."

He turned away, not to see the look that was fading from her face, not tolet himself know its meaning. "Yes," she said, her voice hard, "he isprobably the kind of man I want."

"He's a young physicist from the Utah Institute of Technology,"

he said dryly. "His name is Quentin Daniels. A friend of mine sent him tome a few months ago. He came to see me, but he would not take the job Ioffered. I wanted him on my staff. He had the mind of a scientist. I don'tknow whether he can succeed with your motor, but at least he has the abilityto attempt it. I believe you can still reach him at the Utah Institute ofTechnology. I don't know what he's doing there now—they closed the Institutea year ago."

"Thank you, Dr. Stadler. I shall get in touch with him."

"If ... if you want me to, I'll be glad to help him with the theoreticalpart of it. I'm going to do some work myself, starting from the leads of thatmanuscript. I'd like to find the cardinal secret of energy that its authorhad found. It's his basic principle that we must discover. If we succeed, Mr.Daniels may finish the job, as far as your motor is concerned."

"I will appreciate any help you may care to give me, Dr. Stadler."

They walked silently -through the dead tunnels of the Terminal, down theties of a rusted track under a string of blue lights, to the distant glow ofthe platforms.

At the mouth of the tunnel, they saw a man kneeling on the track,hammering at a switch with the unrhythmical exasperation of uncertainty.Another man stood watching him impatiently.

"Well, what's the matter with the damn thing?" asked the watcher.

"Don't know."

"You've been at it for an hour.""Yeah."

"How long is it going to take?""Who is John Gait?"

Dr. Stadler winced. They had gone past the men, when he said, "I don'tlike that expression."

"I don't, either," she answered."Where did it come from?""Nobody knows."

They were silent, then he said, "I knew a John Gait once. Only he diedlong ago."

"Who was he?"

"I used to think that he was still alive. But now I'm certain that he musthave died. He had such a mind that, had he lived, the whole world would havebeen talking of him by now."

"But the whole world is talking of him."

He stopped still. "Yes . . ."he said slowly, staring at a thought thathad never struck him before, "yes . . . Why?" The word was heavy with thesound of terror.

"Who was he, Dr. Stadler?"

"Why are they talking of him?"

"Who was he?"

He shook his head with a shudder and said sharply, "It's just acoincidence. The name is not uncommon at all. It's a meaningless coincidence.It has no connection with the man I knew. That man is dead."

He did not permit himself to know the full meaning of the words he added:"He has to be dead."

-k -k -k

The order that lay on his desk was marked "Confidential . . .

Emergency . . . Priority . . . Essential need certified by office of TopCo-ordinator . . . for the account of Project X"—and demanded that he sellten thousand tons of Rearden Metal to the State Science Institute.

Rearden read it and glanced up at the superintendent of his mills whostood before him without moving. The superintendent had come in and put theorder down on his desk without a word.

"I thought you'd want to see it," he said, in answer to Rearden's glance.

Rearden pressed a button, summoning Miss Ives. He handed the order to herand said, "Send this back to wherever it came from. Tell them that I will notsell any Rearden Metal to the State Science Institute."

Gwen Ives and the superintendent looked at him, at each other and back athim again; what he saw in their eyes was congratulation.

"Yes, Mr. Rearden," Gwen Ives said formally, taking the slip as if it wereany other kind of business paper. She bowed and left the room. Thesuperintendent followed.

Rearden smiled faintly, in greeting to what they felt. He felt nothingabout that paper or its possible consequences.

By a sort of inner convulsion—which had been like tearing a plug out tocut off the current of his emotions—he had told himself six months ago: Actfirst, keep the mills going, feel later. It had made him able to watchdispassionately the working of the Fair Share Law.

Nobody had known how that law was to be observed. First, he had been toldthat he could not produce Rearden Metal in an amount greater than the tonnageof the best special alloy, other than steel, produced by Orren Boyle. ButOrren Boyle's best special alloy was some cracking mixture that no one caredto buy. Then he had been told that he could produce Rearden Metal in theamount that Orren Boyle could have produced, if he could have produced it.Nobody had known how this was to be determined. Somebody in Washington had

announced a figure, naming a number of tons per year, giving no reasons.Everybody had let it go at that.

He had not known how to give every consumer who demanded it an equal shareof Rearden Metal. The waiting list of orders could not be filled in threeyears, even had he been permitted to work at full capacity. New orders werecoming in daily. They were not orders any longer, in the old, honorable senseof trade; they were demands. The law provided that he could be sued by anyconsumer who failed to receive his fair share of Rearden Metal.

Nobody had known how to determine what constituted a fair share of whatamount. Then a bright young boy just out of college had been sent to him fromWashington, as Deputy Director of Distribution. After many telephoneconferences with the capital, the boy announced that customers would get fivehundred tons of the Metal each, in the order of the dates of theirapplications. Nobody had argued against his figure.

There was no way to form an argument; the figure could have been one poundor one million tons, with the same validity. The boy had established anoffice at the Rearden mills, where four girls took applications for shares ofRearden Metal. At the present rate of the mills'

production, the applications extended well into the next century.

Five hundred tons of Rearden Metal could not provide three miles of railfor Taggart Transcontinental; it could not provide the bracing for one of KenDanagger's coal mines. The largest industries, Rearden's best customers, weredenied the use of his Metal. But golf clubs made of Rearden Metal weresuddenly appearing on the market, as well as coffee pots, garden tools andbathroom faucets. Ken Danagger, who had seen the value of the Metal and haddared to order it against a fury of public opinion, was not permitted toobtain it; his order had been left unfilled, cut off without warning by thenew laws. Mr. Mowen, who had betrayed Taggart Transcontinental in its mostdangerous hour, was now making switches of Rearden Metal and selling them tothe Atlantic Southern. Rearden looked on, his emotions plugged out.

He turned away, without a word, when anybody mentioned to him whateverybody knew: the quick fortunes that were being made on Rearden Metal."Well, no," people said in drawing rooms, "you mustn't call it a blackmarket, because it isn't, really. Nobody is selling the Metal illegally.They're just selling their right to it. Not selling really, just poolingtheir shares." He did not want to know the insect intricacy of the dealsthrough which the "shares" were sold and pooled—nor how a manufacturer inVirginia had produced, in two months, five thousand tons of castings made ofRearden Metal—nor what man in Washington was that manufacturer's unlistedpartner.

He knew that their profit on a ton of Rearden Metal was five times largerthan his own. He said nothing. Everybody had a right to the Metal, excepthimself.

The young boy from Washington—whom the steel workers had nicknamed the WetNurse—hung around Rearden with a primitive, astonished curiosity which,incredibly, was a form of admiration. Rearden watched him with disgustedamusement. The boy had no inkling of any concept of morality; it had beenbred out of him by his college; this had left him an odd frankness, naive andcynical at once, like the innocence of a savage.

"You despise me, Mr. Rearden," he had declared once, suddenly and withoutany resentment. "That's impractical."

"Why is it impractical?" Rearden had asked.

The boy had looked puzzled and had found no answer. He never had an answerto any "why?" He spoke in flat assertions. He would say about people, "He'sold-fashioned," "He's unreconstructed," "He's unadjusted," without hesitationor explanation; he would also say, while being a graduate in metallurgy,"Iron smelting, I think, seems to require a high temperature." He uttered

nothing but uncertain opinions about physical nature—and nothing butcategorical imperatives about men.

"Mr. Rearden," he had said once, "if you feel you'd like to hand out moreof the Metal to friends of yours—I mean, in bigger hauls—it could bearranged, you know. Why don't we apply for a special permission on the groundof essential need? I've got a few friends in Washington. Your friends arepretty important people, big businessmen, so it wouldn't be difficult to getaway with the essential need dodge. Of course, there would be a few expenses.For things in Washington, You know how it is, things always occasionexpenses. "

"What things?"

"You understand what I mean."

"No," Rearden had said, "I don't. Why don't you explain it to me?"The boy had looked at him uncertainly, weighed it in his mind, then comeout with: "It's bad psychology.""What is?"

"You know, Mr. Rearden, it's not necessary to use such words as that.""As what?"

"Words are relative. They're only symbols. If we don't use ugly symbols,we won't have any ugliness. Why do you want me to say things one way, whenI've already said them another?"

"Which way do I want you to say them?"

"Why do you want me to?"

"For the same reason that you don't."

The boy had remained silent for a moment, then had said, "You know, Mr.Rearden, there are no absolute standards. We can't go by rigid principles,we've got to be flexible, we've got to adjust to the reality of the day andact on the expediency of the moment."

"Run along, punk. Go and try to pour a ton of steel without rigidprinciples, on the expediency of the moment."

A strange sense, which was almost a sense of style, made Rearden feelcontempt for the boy, but no resentment. The boy seemed to fit the spirit ofthe events around them. It was as if they were being carried back across along span of centuries to the age where the boy had belonged, but he,Rearden, had not. Instead of building new furnaces, thought Rearden, he wasnow running a losing race to keep the old ones going; instead of starting newventures, new research, new experiments in the use of Rearden Metal, he wasspending the whole of his energy on a quest for sources of iron ore: like themen at the dawn of the Iron Age—he thought—but with less hope.

He tried to avoid these thoughts. He had to stand on guard against his ownfeeling—as if some part of him had become a stranger that had to be keptnumb, and his will had to be its constant, watchful anesthetic. That part wasan unknown of which he knew only that he must never see its root and nevergive it voice. He had lived through one dangerous moment which he could notallow to return.

It was the moment when—alone in his office, on a winter evening, heldparalyzed by a newspaper spread on his desk with a long column of directiveson the front page—he had heard on the radio the news of Ellis Wyatt's flamingoil fields. Then, his first reaction—before any thought of the future, anysense of disaster, any shock, terror or protest —had been to burst outlaughing. He had laughed in triumph, in deliverance, in a spurting, livingexultation—and the words which he had not pronounced, but felt, were: Godbless you, Ellis, whatever you're doing!

When he had grasped the implications of his laughter, he had known that hewas now condemned to constant vigilance against himself. Like the survivor ofa heart attack, he knew that he had had a warning and that he carried withinhim a danger that could strike him at any moment.

He had held it off, since then. He had kept an even, cautious, severelycontrolled pace in his inner steps. But it had come close to him for amoment, once again. When he had looked at the order of the State ScienceInstitute on his desk, it had seemed to him that the glow moving over thepaper did not come from the furnaces outside, but from the flames of aburning oil field.

"Mr. Rearden," said the Wet Nurse, when he heard about the rejected order,"you shouldn't have done that.""Why not?"

"There's going to be trouble.""What kind of trouble?"

"It's a government order. You can't reject a government order.""Why can't I?"

"It's an Essential Need project, and secret, too. It's very important."

"What kind of a project is it?"

"I don't know. It's secret."

"Then how do you know it's important?"

"It said so."

"Who said so?"

"You can't doubt such a thing as that, Mr. Rearden!""Why can't 1?""But you can't."

"If I can't, then that would make it an absolute and you said there aren'tany absolutes."

"That's different.""How is it different?""It's the government."

"You mean, there aren't any absolutes except the government?"

"I mean, if they say it's important, then it is."

"Why?"

"I don't want you to get in trouble, Mr. Rearden, and you're going to,sure as hell. You ask too many why's. Now why do you do that?"

Rearden glanced at him and chuckled. The boy noticed his own words andgrinned sheepishly, but he looked unhappy.

The man who came to see Rearden a week later was youngish and slenderish,but neither as young nor as slender as he tried to make himself appear. Hewore civilian clothes and the leather leggings of a traffic cop. Reardencould not quite get it clear whether he came from the State Science Instituteor from Washington.

"I understand that you refused to sell metal to the State ScienceInstitute, Mr. Rearden," he said in a soft, confidential tone of voice.

"That's right," said Rearden.

"But wouldn't that constitute a willful disobedience of the law?"

"It's for you to interpret."

"May I ask your reason?"

"My reason is of no interest to you."

"Oh, but of course it is! We are not your enemies, Mr. Rearden. We want tobe fair to you. You mustn't be afraid of the fact that you are a bigindustrialist. We won't hold it against you. We actually want to be as fairto you as to the lowest day laborer. We would like to know your reason."

"Print my refusal in the newspapers, and any reader will tell you myreason. It appeared in all the newspapers a little over a year ago."

"Oh, no, no, no! Why talk of newspapers? Can't we settle this as afriendly, private matter?"

"That's up to you."

"We don't want this in the newspapers.""No?"

"No. We wouldn't want to hurt you."

Rearden glanced at him and asked, "Why does the State Science Instituteneed ten thousand tons of metal? What is Project X?"

"Oh, that? It's a very important project of scientific research, anundertaking of great social value that may prove of inestimable publicbenefit, but, unfortunately, the regulations of top policy do not permit meto tell you its nature in fuller detail."

"You know," said Rearden, "I could tell you—as my reason—that I do notwish to sell my Metal to those whose purpose is kept secret from me. Icreated that Metal. It is my moral responsibility to know for what purpose Ipermit it to be used."

"Oh, but you don't have to worry about that, Mr. Rearden! We relieve youof the responsibility."

"Suppose I don't wish to be relieved of it?"

"But . . . but that is an old-fashioned and . . . and purely theoreticalattitude."

"I said I could name it as my reason. But I won't—because, in this case, Ihave another, inclusive reason. I would not sell any Rearden Metal to theState Science Institute for any purpose whatever, good or bad, secret oropen."

"But why?"

"Listen," said Rearden slowly, "there might be some sort of justificationfor the savage societies in which a man had to expect that enemies couldmurder him at any moment and had to defend himself as best he could. Butthere can be no justification for a society in which a man is expected tomanufacture the weapons for his own murderers."

"I don't think it's advisable to use such words, Mr. Rearden. I don'tthink it's practical to think in such terms. After all, the governmentcannot—in the pursuit of wide, national policies—take cognizance of yourpersonal grudge against some one particular institution."

"Then don't take cognizance of it."

"What do you mean?"

"Don't come asking my reason."

"But, Mr. Rearden, we cannot let a refusal to obey the law pass unnoticed.What do you expect us to do?""Whatever you wish."

"But this is totally unprecedented. Nobody has ever refused to sell anessential commodity to the government. As a matter of fact, the law does notpermit you to refuse to sell your Metal to any consumer, let alone thegovernment."

"Well, why don't you arrest me, then?"

"Mr. Rearden, this is an amicable discussion. Why speak of such things asarrests ?"

"Isn't that your ultimate argument against me?""Why bring it up?"

"Isn't it implied in every sentence of this discussion?""Why name it?"

"Why not?" There was no answer. "Arc you trying to hide from me the factthat if it weren't for that trump card of yours, I wouldn't have allowed youto enter this office?"

"But I'm not speaking of arrests."

"I am.11

"I don't understand you, Mr. Rearden."

"I am not helping you to pretend that this is any sort of amicablediscussion. It isn't. Now do what you please about it."

There was a strange look on the man's face: bewilderment, as if he had noconception of the issue confronting him, and fear, as if he had always hadfull knowledge of it and had lived in dread of exposure.

Rearden felt a strange excitement; he felt as if he were about to graspsomething he had never understood, as if he were on the trail of somediscovery still too distant to know, except that it had the most immenseimportance he had ever glimpsed.

"Mr. Rearden" said the man, "the government needs your Metal.

You have to sell it to us, because surely you realize that thegovernment's plans cannot be held up by the matter of your consent."

"A sale," said Rearden slowly, "requires the seller's consent." He got upand walked to the window. "I'll tell you what you can do."

He pointed to the siding where ingots of Rearden Metal were being loadedonto freight cars. "There's Rearden Metal. Drive down there with your trucks-like any other looter, but without his risk, because I won't shoot you, asyou know I can't—take as much of the Metal as you wish and go. Don't try tosend me payment. I won't accept it.

Don't print out a check to me. It won't be cashed. If you want that Metal,you have the guns to seize it. Go ahead."

"Good God, Mr. Rearden, what would the public think!"

It was an instinctive, involuntary cry. The muscles of Rearden's facemoved briefly in a soundless laughter. Both of them had understood theimplications of that cry. Rearden said evenly, in the grave, unstrained toneof finality, "You need my help to make it look like a sale—like a safe, just,moral transaction. I will not help you."

The man did not argue. He rose to leave. He said only, "You will regretthe stand you've taken, Mr. Rearden."

"I don't think so," said Rearden.

He knew that the incident was not ended. He knew also that the secrecy ofProject X was not the main reason why these people feared to make the issuepublic. He knew that he felt an odd, joyous, lighthearted self-confidence. Heknew that these were the right steps down the trail he had glimpsed.

Dagny lay stretched in an armchair of her living room, her eyes closed.This day had been hard, but she knew that she would see Hank Rearden tonight.The thought of it was like a lever lifting the weight of hours of senselessugliness away from her.

She lay still, content to rest with the single purpose of waiting quietlyfor the sound of the key in the lock. He had not telephoned her, but she hadheard that he was in New York today for a conference with producers ofcopper, and he never left the city till next morning, nor spent a night inNew York that was not hers. She liked to wait for him. She needed a span oftime as a bridge between her days and his nights.

The hours ahead, like all her nights with him, would be added, shethought, to that savings account of one's life where moments of time arestored in the pride of having been lived. The only pride of her workday wasnot that it had been lived, but that it had been survived.

It was wrong, she thought, it was viciously wrong that one should ever beforced to say that about any hour of one's life. But she could not think ofit now. She was thinking of him, of the struggle she had watched through themonths behind them, his struggle for deliverance; she had known that shecould help him win, but must help him in every way except in words.

She thought of the evening last winter when he came in, took a smallpackage from his pocket and held it out to her, saying, "I want you to haveit." She opened it and stared in incredulous bewilderment at a pendant madeof a single pear-shaped ruby that spurted a violent fire on the white satinof the jeweler's box. It was a famous stone, which only a dozen men in theworld could properly afford to purchase; he was not one of them.

"Hank . . . why?"

"No special reason. I just wanted to see you wear it."

"Oh, no, not a thing of this kind! Why waste it? I go so rarely tooccasions where one has to dress. When would I ever wear it?"

He looked at her, his glance moving slowly from her legs to her face."I'll show you," he said.

He led her to the bedroom, he took off her clothes, without a word, in themanner of an owner undressing a person whose consent is not required. Heclasped the pendant on her shoulders. She stood naked, the stone between herbreasts, like a sparkling drop of blood.

"Do you think a man should give jewelry to his mistress for any purposebut his own pleasure?" he asked. "This is the way I want you to wear it. Onlyfor me. I like to look at it. It's beautiful,"

She laughed; it was a soft, low, breathless sound. She could not speak ormove, only nod silently in acceptance and obedience; she nodded severaltimes, her hair swaying with the wide, circular movement of her head, thenhanging still as she kept her head bowed to him.

She dropped down on the bed. She lay stretched lazily, her head thrownback, her arms at her sides, palms pressed to the rough texture of thebedspread, one leg bent, the long line of the other extended across the darkblue linen of the spread, the stone glowing like a wound in the semi-darkness, throwing a star of rays against her skin.

Her eyes were half-closed in the mocking, conscious triumph of beingadmired, but her mouth was half-open in helpless, begging expectation. Hestood across the room, looking at her, at her flat stomach drawn in, as herbreath was drawn, at the sensitive body of a sensitive consciousness. Hesaid, his voice low, intent and oddly quiet: "Dagny, if some artist paintedyou as you are now, men would come to look at the painting to experience amoment that nothing could give them in their own lives. They would call itgreat art. They would not know the nature of what they felt, but the paintingwould show them everything—even that you're not some classical Venus, but theVice-President of a railroad, because that's part of it—even what I am,because that's part of it, too. Dagny, they'd feel it and go away and sleepwith the first barmaid in sight—and they'd never try to reach what they hadfelt. I wouldn't want to seek it from a painting.

I'd want it real. I'd take no pride in any hopeless longing. I wouldn'thold a stillborn aspiration. I'd want to have it, to make it, to live it.

Do you understand?"

"Oh yes, Hank, 7 understand!" she said. Do you, my darling?—do youunderstand it fully?—she thought, but did not say it aloud.

On the evening of a blizzard, she came home to find an enormous spread oftropical flowers standing in her living room against the dark glass ofwindows battered by snowflakes. They were stems of Hawaiian Torch Ginger,three feet tall; their large heads were cones of petals that had the sensualtexture of soft leather and the color of blood. "I saw them in a florist'swindow," he told her when he came, that night.

"I liked seeing them through a blizzard. But there's nothing as wasted asan object in a public window."

She began to find flowers in her apartment at unpredictable times, flowerssent without a card, but with the signature of the sender in their fantasticshapes, in the violent colors, in the extravagant cost. He brought her a goldnecklace made of small hinged squares that formed a spread of solid gold tocover her neck and shoulders, like the collar of a knight's armor—"Wear itwith a black dress," he ordered. He brought her a set of glasses that weretall, slender blocks of square-cut crystal, made by a famous jeweler. Shewatched the way he held one of the glasses when she served him a drink—as ifthe touch of the texture under his fingers, the taste of the drink and the

sight of her face were the single form of an indivisible moment of enjoyment."I used to see things I liked, " he said, "but I never bought them. Theredidn't seem to be much meaning in it. There is, now."

He telephoned her at the office, one winter morning, and said, not in thetone of an invitation, but in the tone of an executive's order, "We're goingto have dinner together tonight, T want you to dress. Do you have any sort ofblue evening gown? Wear it."

The dress she wore was a slender tunic of dusty blue that gave her a lookof unprotected simplicity, the look of a statue in the blue shadows of agarden under the summer sun. What he brought and put over her shoulders was acape of blue fox that swallowed her from the curve of her chin to the tips ofher sandals. "Hank, that's preposterous"—she laughed—"it's not my kind ofthing!" "No?" he asked, drawing her to a mirror.

The huge blanket of fur made her look like a child bundled for asnowstorm; the luxurious texture transformed the innocence of the awkwardbundle into the elegance of a perversely intentional contrast: into a look ofstressed sensuality. The fur was a soft brown, dimmed by an aura of blue thatcould not be seen, only felt like an enveloping mist, like a suggestion ofcolor grasped not by one's eyes but by one's hands, as if one felt, withoutcontact, the sensation of sinking one's palms into the fur's softness. Thecape left nothing to be seen of her, except the brown of her hair, the blue-gray of her eyes, the shape of her mouth.

She turned to him, her smile startled and helpless. "I ... I didn't knowit would look like that."

"I did."

She sat beside him in his car as he drove through the dark streets of thecity. A sparkling net of snow flashed into sight once in a while, when theywent past the lights on the corners. She did not ask where they were going.She sat low in the scat, leaning back, looking up at the snowflakes. The furcape was wrapped tightly about her; within it, her dress felt as light as anightgown and the feel of the cape was like an embrace.

She looked at the angular tiers of lights rising through the snowycurtain, and—glancing at him, at the grip of his gloved hands on the wheel,at the austere, fastidious elegance of the figure in black overcoat and whitemuffler—she thought that he belonged in a great city, among polishedsidewalks and sculptured stone.

The car went down into a tunnel, streaked through an echoing tube of tileunder the river and rose to the coils of an elevated highway under an openblack sky. The lights were below them now, spread in flat miles of bluishwindows, of smokestacks, slanting cranes, red gusts of fire, and long, dimrays silhouetting the contorted shapes of an industrial district. She thoughtthat she had seen him once, at his mills, with smudges of soot on hisforehead, dressed in acid-eaten overalls; he had worn them as naturally wellas he wore his formal clothes. He belonged here, too—she thought, lookingdown at the flats of New Jersey—among the cranes, the fires and the grindingclatter of gears.

When they sped down a dark road through an empty countryside, with thestrands of snow glittering across their headlights—she remembered how he hadlooked in the summer of their vacation, dressed in slacks, stretched on theground of a lonely ravine, with the grass under his body and the sun on hisbare arms. He belonged in the countryside, she thought—he belongedeverywhere—he was a man who belonged on earth—and then she thought of thewords which were more exact: he was a man to whom the earth belonged, the manat home on earth and in control. Why, then—she wondered—should he have had tocarry a burden of tragedy which, in silent endurance, he had accepted socompletely that he had barely known he carried it? She knew part of theanswer; she felt as if the whole answer were close and she would grasp it on

some approaching day. But she did not want to think of it now, because theywere moving away from the burdens, because within the space of a speeding carthey held the stillness of full happiness. She moved her head imperceptiblyto let it touch his shoulder for a moment.

The car left the highway and turned toward the lighted squares of distantwindows, that hung above the snow beyond a grillwork of bare branches. Then,in a soft, dim light, they sat at a table by a window facing darkness andtrees. The inn stood on a knoll in the woods; it had the luxury of high costand privacy, and an air of beautiful taste suggesting that it had not beendiscovered by those who sought high cost and notice. She was barely aware ofthe dining room; it blended away into a sense of superlative comfort, and theonly ornament that caught her attention was the glitter of iced branchesbeyond the glass of the window.

She sat, looking out, the blue fur half-slipping off her naked arms andshoulders. He watched her through narrowed eyes, with the satisfaction of aman studying his own workmanship.

"I like giving things to you," he said, "because you don't need them."

"No?"

"And it's not that I want you to have them. I want you to have them fromme. "

"That is the way I do need them, Hank. From you."

"Do you understand that it's nothing but vicious self-indulgence on mypart? I'm not doing it for your pleasure, but for mine."

"Hank!" The cry was involuntary; it held amusement, despair, indignationand pity. "If you'd given me those things just for my pleasure, not yours, Iwould have thrown them in your face."

"Yes . . . Yes, then you would—and should."

"Did you call it your vicious self-indulgence?"

"That's what they call it."

"Oh, yes! That's what they call it. What do you call it, Hank?"

"I don't know," he said indifferently, and went on intently. "I know onlythat if it's vicious, then let me be damned for it but that's what I want todo more than anything else on earth."

She did not answer; she sat looking straight at him with a faint smile, asif asking him to listen to the meaning of his own words.

"I've always wanted to enjoy my wealth," he said. "I didn't know how to doit. I didn't even have time to know how much T wanted to.

But I knew that all the steel I poured came back to me as liquid gold, andthe gold was meant to harden into any shape I wished, and it was I who had toenjoy it. Only I couldn't. I couldn't find any purpose for it. I've found it,now. It's I who've produced that wealth and it's I who am going to let it buyfor me every kind of pleasure I want—including the pleasure of seeing Rowmuch I'm able to pay for—including the preposterous feat of turning you intoa luxury object."

"But I'm a luxury object that you've paid for long ago," she said; she wasnot smiling."How?"

"By means of the same values with which you paid for your mills."

She did not know whether he understood it with that full, luminousfinality which is a thought named in words; but she knew that what he felt inthat moment was understanding. She saw the relaxation of an invisible smilein his eyes.

"I've never despised luxury," he said, "yet I've always despised those whoenjoyed it. I looked at what they called their pleasures and it seemed somiserably senseless to me—after what I felt at the mills. I used to watchsteel being poured, tons of liquid steel running as I wanted it to, where Iwanted it. And then I'd go to a banquet and I'd see people who sat trembling

in awe before their own gold dishes and lace tablecloths, as if their diningroom were the master and they were just objects serving it, objects createdby their diamond shirt studs and necklaces, not the other way around. ThenI'd run to the sight of the first slag heap I could find—and they'd say thatI didn't know how to enjoy life, because I cared for nothing but business."

He looked at the dim, sculptured beauty of the room and at the people whosat at the tables. They sat in a manner of self-conscious display, as if theenormous cost of their clothes and the enormous care of their grooming shouldhave fused into splendor, but didn't. Their faces had a look of rancorousanxiety.

"Dagny, look at those people. They're supposed to be the playboys of life,the amusement-seekers and luxury-lovers. They sit there, waiting for thisplace to give them meaning, not the other way around.

But they're always shown to us as the enjoyers of material pleasures —andthen we're taught that enjoyment of material pleasures is evil.

Enjoyment? Are they enjoying it? Isn't there some sort of perversion inwhat we're taught, some error that's vicious and very important?"

"Yes, Hank—very vicious and very, very important."

"They are the playboys, while we're just tradesmen, you and I. Do yourealize that we're much more capable of enjoying this place than they canever hope to be?"

"Yes."

He said slowly, in the tone of a quotation, "Why have we left it all tofools? It should have been ours." She looked at him, startled. He smiled. "Iremember every word you said to me at that party. I didn't answer you then,because the only answer I had, the only thing your words meant to me, was ananswer that you would hate me for, I thought; it was that I wanted you." Helooked at her. "Dagny, you didn't intend it then, but what you were sayingwas that you wanted to sleep with me, wasn't it?"

"Yes, Hank. Of course."

He held her eyes, then looked away. They were silent for a long time. Heglanced at the soft twilight around them, then at the sparkle of two wineglasses on their table. "Dagny, in my youth, when I was working in the oremines in Minnesota, I thought that I wanted to reach an evening like this.No, that was not what I was working for, and I didn't think of it often. Butonce in a while, on a winter night, when the stars were out and it was verycold, when I was tired, because I had worked two shifts, and wanted nothingon earth except to lie down and fall asleep right there, on the mine ledge—Ithought that some day I would sit in a place like this, where one drink ofwine would cost more than my day's wages, and I would have earned the priceof every minute of it and of every drop and of every flower on the table, andI would sit there for no purpose but my own amusement."

She asked, smiling, "With your mistress?"

She saw the shot of pain in his eyes and wished desperately that she hadnot said it.

"With ... a woman," he answered. She knew the word he had notpronounced. He went on, his voice soft and steady: "When I became rich andsaw what the rich did for their amusement, I thought that the place I hadimagined, did not exist. I had not even imagined it too clearly. I did notknow what it would be like, only what I would feel. I gave up expecting ityears ago. But I feel it tonight."

He raised his glass, looking at her.

"Hank, I . . . I'd give up anything I've ever had in my life, except mybeing a ... a luxury object of your amusement."

He saw her hand trembling as she held her glass. He said evenly, "I knowit, dearest."

She sat shocked and still: he had never used that word before. He threwhis head back and smiled the most brilliantly gay smile she had ever seen onhis face.

"Your first moment of weakness, Dagny," he said.

She laughed and shook her head. He stretched his arm across the table andclosed his hand over her naked shoulder, as if giving her an instant'ssupport. Laughing softly, and as if by accident, she let her mouth brushagainst his fingers; it kept her face down for the one moment when he couldhave seen that the brilliance of her eyes was tears.

When she looked up at him, her smile matched his—and the rest of theevening was their celebration—for all his years since the nights on the mineledges—for all her years since the night of her first ball when, in desolatelonging for an uncaptured vision of gaiety, she had wondered about the peoplewho expected the lights and the flowers to make them brilliant.

"Isn't there ... in what we're taught . . . some error that's viciousand very important?"—she thought of his words, as she lay in an armchair ofher living room, on a dismal evening of spring, waiting for him to come. . .. Just a little farther, my darling—she thought-look a little farther and you'll be free of that error and of all thewasted pain you never should have had to carry. . . . But she felt that she,too, had not seen the whole of the distance, and she wondered what were thesteps left for her to discover. . . .

Walking through the darkness of the streets, on his way to her apartment,Rearden kept his hands in his coat pockets and his arms pressed to his sides,because he felt that he did not want to touch anything or brush againstanyone. He had never experienced it before —this sense of revulsion that wasnot aroused by any particular object, but seemed to flood everything aroundhim, making the city seem sodden. He could understand disgust for any onething, and he could fight that thing with the healthy indignation of knowingthat it did not belong in the world; but this was new to him—this feelingthat the world was a loathsome place where he did not want to belong.

He had held a conference with the producers of copper, who had just beengarroted by a set of directives that would put them out of existence inanother year. He had had no advice to give them, no solution to offer; hisingenuity, which had made him famous as the man who would always find a wayto keep production going, had not been able to discover a way to save them.But they had all known that there was no way; ingenuity was a virtue of themind—and in the issue confronting them, the mind had been discarded asirrelevant long ago. "It's a deal between the boys in Washington and theimporters of copper," one of the men had said, "mainly d'Anconia Copper."

This was only a small, extraneous stab of pain, he thought, a feeling ofdisappointment in an expectation he had never had the right to expect; heshould have known that this was just what a man like Francisco d'Anconiawould do—and he wondered angrily why he felt as if a bright, brief flame haddied somewhere in a lightless world.

He did not know whether the impossibility of acting had given him thissense of loathing, or whether the loathing had made him lose the desire toact. It's both, he thought; a desire presupposes the possibility of action toachieve it; action presupposes a goal which is worth achieving. If the onlygoal possible was to wheedle a precarious moment's favor from men who heldguns, then neither action nor desire could exist any longer.

Then could life?—he asked himself indifferently. Life, he thought, hadbeen defined as motion; man's life was purposeful motion; what was the stateof a being to whom purpose and motion were denied, a being held in chains butleft to breathe and to see all the magnificence of the possibilities he couldhave reached, left to scream "Why?" and to be shown the muzzle of a gun as

sole explanation? He shrugged, walking on; he did not care even to find ananswer.

He observed, indifferently, the devastation wrought by his ownindifference. No matter how hard a struggle he had lived through in the past,he had never reached the ultimate ugliness of abandoning the will to act. Inmoments of suffering, he had never let pain win its one permanent victory: hehad never allowed it to make him lose the desire for joy. He had neverdoubted the nature of the world or man's greatness as its motive power andits core. Years ago, he had wondered with contemptuous incredulity about thefanatical sects that appeared among men in the dark corners of history, thesects who believed that man was trapped in a malevolent universe ruled byevil for the sole purpose of his torture. Tonight, he knew what their visionof the world and their feel of it had been. If what he now saw around him wasthe world in which he lived, then he did not want to touch any part of it, hedid not want to fight it, he was an outsider with nothing at stake and noconcern for remaining alive much longer.

Dagny and his wish to see her were the only exception left to him.

The wish remained. But in a sudden shock, he realized that he felt nodesire to sleep with her tonight. That desire—which had never given him amoment's rest, which had been growing, feeding on its own satisfaction—waswiped out. It was an odd impotence, neither of his mind nor of his body. Hefelt, as passionately as he had ever felt it, that she was the most desirablewoman on earth; but what came from it was only a desire to desire her, a wishto feel, not a feeling. The sense of numbness seemed impersonal, as if itsroot were neither in him nor in her; as if it were the act of sex that nowbelonged to a realm which he had left.

"Don't get up—stay there—it's so obvious that you've been waiting for methat I want to look at it longer."

He said it, from the doorway of her apartment, seeing her stretched in anarmchair, seeing the eager little jolt that threw her shoulders forward asshe was about to rise; he was smiling.

He noted—as if some part of him were watching his reactions with detachedcuriosity—that his smile and his sudden sense of gaiety were real. He graspeda feeling that he had always experienced, but never identified because it hadalways been absolute and immediate: a feeling that forbade him ever to faceher in pain. It was much more than the pride of wishing to conceal hissuffering: it was the feeling that suffering must not be granted recognitionin her presence, that no form of claim between them should ever be motivatedby pain and aimed at pity. It was not pity that he brought here or came hereto find.

"Do you still need proof that I'm always waiting for you?" she asked,leaning obediently back in her chair; her voice was neither tender norpleading, but bright and mocking.

"Dagny, why is it that most women would never admit that, but you do?"

"Because they're never sure that they ought to be wanted. I am."

"I do admire self-confidence."

"Self-confidence was only one part of what I said, Hank.""What's the whole?"

"Confidence of my value—and yours." He glanced at her as if catching thespark of a sudden thought, and she laughed, adding, "I wouldn't be sure ofholding a man like Orren Boyle, for instance. He wouldn't want me at all. Youwould."

"Are you saying," he asked slowly, "that I rose in your estimation whenyou found that I wanted you?""Of course."

"That's not the reaction of most people to being wanted.""It isn't."

"Most people feel that they rise in their own eyes, if others want them.".

"I feel that others live up to me, if they want me. And that is the wayyou feel, too, Hank, about yourself—whether you admit it or not,"

That's not what I said to you then, on that first morning—he thought,looking down at her. She lay stretched out lazily, her face blank, but hereyes bright with amusement. He knew that she was thinking of it and that sheknew he was. He smiled, but said nothing else.

As he sat half-stretched on the couch, watching her across the room, hefelt at peace—as if some temporary wall had risen between him and the thingshe had felt on his way here. He told her about his encounter with the manfrom the State Science Institute, because, even though he knew that the eventheld danger, an odd, glowing sense of satisfaction still remained from it inhis mind.

He chuckled at her look of indignation. "Don't bother being angry atthem," he said. "It's no worse than all the rest of what they're doing everyday. "

"Hank, do you want me to speak to Dr. Stadler about it?""Certainly not!"

"He ought to stop it. He could at least do that much."

"I'd rather go to jail. Dr. Stadler? You're not having anything to do withhim, are you?"

"1 saw him a few days ago.""Why?"

"In regard to the motor."

"The motor . . . ?" He said it slowly, in a strange way, as if the thoughtof the motor had suddenly brought back to him a realm he had forgotten."Dagny . . . the man who invented that motor . . .

he did exist, didn't he?"

"Why ... of course. What do you mean?"

"I mean only that . . . that it's a pleasant thought, isn't it? Even ifhe's dead now, he was alive once ... so alive that he designed that motor.

"What's the matter, Hank?""Nothing. Tell me about the motor."

She told him about her meeting with Dr. Stadler. She got up and paced theroom, while speaking; she could not lie still, she always felt a surge ofhope and of eagerness for action when she dealt with the subject of themotor.

The first thing he noticed were the lights of the city beyond the window:he felt as if they were being turned on, one by one, forming the greatskyline he loved; he felt it, even though he knew that the lights had beenthere all the time. Then he understood that the thing which was returning waswithin him: the shape coming back drop by drop was his love for the city.Then he knew that it had come back because he was looking at the city pastthe taut, slender figure of a woman whose head was lifted eagerly as at asight of distance, whose steps were a restless substitute for flight. He waslooking at her as at a stranger, he was barely aware that she was a woman,but the sight was flowing into a feeling the words for which were: This isthe world and the core of it, this is what made the city—they go together,the angular shapes of the buildings and the angular lines of a face strippedof everything but purpose—the rising steps of steel and the steps of a beingintent upon his goal—this is what they had been, all the men who had lived toinvent the lights, the steel, the furnaces, the motors—

they were the world, they, not the men who crouched in dark corners, half-begging, half-threatening, boastfully displaying their open sores as theironly claim on life and virtue—so long as he knew that there existed one manwith the bright courage of a new thought, could he give up the world to those

others?—so long as he could find a single sight to give him a life-restoringshot of admiration, could he believe that the world belonged to the sores,the moans and the guns?—the men who invented motors did exist, he would neverdoubt their reality, it was his vision of them that had made the contrast-unbearable, so that even the loathing was the tribute of his loyalty to themand to that world which was theirs and his.

"Darling . . ."he said, "darling . . ." like a man awakening suddenly,when he noticed that she had stopped speaking.

"What's the matter, Hank?" she asked softly.

"Nothing . . . Except that you shouldn't have called Stadler." His facewas bright with confidence, his voice sounded amused, protective and gentle;she could discover nothing else, he looked as he had always looked, it wasonly the note of gentleness that seemed strange and new.

"I kept feeling that I shouldn't have," she said, "but I didn't know why."

"I'll tell you why." He leaned forward. "What he wanted from you was arecognition that he was still the Dr, Robert Stadler he should have been, butwasn't and knew he wasn't. He wanted you to grant him your respect, in spiteof and in contradiction to his actions. He wanted you to juggle reality forhim, so that his greatness would remain, but the State Science Institutewould be wiped out, as if it had never existed—and you're the only one whocould do it for him."

"Why I?"

"Because you're the victim."

She looked at him, startled. He spoke intently; he felt a sudden, violentclarity of perception, as if a surge of energy were rushing into the activityof sight, fusing the half-seen and haft-grasped into a single shape anddirection.

"Dagny, they're doing something that we've never understood. They knowsomething which we don't, but should discover. I can't see it fully yet, butI'm beginning to see parts of it. That looter from the State ScienceInstitute was scared when I refused to help him pretend that he was just anhonest buyer of my Metal. He was scared way deep. Of what? I don't know-public opinion was just his name for it, but it's not the full name. Whyshould he have been scared? He has the guns, the jails, the laws—he couldhave seized the whole of my mills, if he wished, and nobody would have risento defend me, and he knew it—so why should he have cared what I thought? Buthe did.

It was I who had to tell him that he wasn't a looter, but my customer andfriend. That's what he needed from me. And that's what Dr. Stadler neededfrom you—it was you who had to act as if he were a great man who had nevertried to destroy your rail and my Metal. I don't know what it is that theythink they accomplish—but they want us to pretend that we sec the world asthey pretend they see it. They need some sort of sanction from us. I don'tknow the nature of that sanction—but. Dagny, I know that if we value ourlives, we must not give it to them. If they put you on a torture rack, don'tgive it to them. Let them destroy your railroad and my mills, but don't giveit to them. Because I know this much: I know that that's our only chance."

She had remained standing still before him, looking attentively at thefaint outline of some shape she, too, had tried to grasp.

"Yes . . ." she said, "yes, I know what you've seen in them. . . .

I've felt it, too—but it's only like something brushing past that's gonebefore I know I've seen it, like a touch of cold air, and what's left isalways the feeling that I should have stopped it. . . .1 know that you'reright. I can't understand their game, but this much is right: We must not seethe world as they want us to see it. It's some sort of fraud, very ancientand very vast—and the key to break it is: to check every premise they teachus, to question every precept, to—"

She whirled to him at a sudden thought, but she cut the motion and thewords in the same instant: the next words- would have been the ones she didnot want to say to him. She stood looking at him with a slow, bright smile ofcuriosity.

Somewhere within him, he knew the thought she would not name, but he knewit only in that prenatal shape which has to find its words in the future. Hedid not pause to grasp it now—because in the flooding brightness of what hefelt, another thought, which was its predecessor, had become clear to him andhad been holding him for many minutes past. He rose, approached her and tookher in his arms.

He held the length of her body pressed to his, as if their bodies were twocurrents rising upward together, each to a single point, each carrying thewhole of their consciousness to the meeting of their lips.

What she felt in that moment contained, as one nameless part of it, theknowledge of the beauty in the posture of his body as he held her, as theystood in the middle of a room high above the lights of the city.

What he knew, what he had discovered tonight, was that his recaptured loveof existence had not been given back to him by the return of his desire forher—but that the desire had returned after he had regained his world, thelove, the value and the sense of his world—

and that the desire was not an answer to her body, but a celebration ofhimself and of his will to live.

He did not know it, he did not think of it, he was past the need of words,but in the moment when he felt the response of her body to his, he felt alsothe unadmitted knowledge that that which he had called her depravity was herhighest virtue—this capacity of hers to feel the joy of being, as he felt it.

CHAPTER IITHE ARISTOCRACY OF PULL

The calendar in the sky beyond the window of her office said: September 2.Dagny leaned wearily across her desk. The first light to snap on at theapproach of dusk was always the ray that hit the calendar; when the white-glowing page appeared above the roofs, it blurred the city, hastening thedarkness.

She had looked at that distant page every evening of the months behindher. Your days are numbered, it had seemed to say—as if it were marking aprogression toward something it knew, but she didn't. Once, it had clockedher race to build the John Gait Line; now it was clocking her race against anunknown destroyer.

One by one, the men who had built new towns in Colorado, had departed intosome silent unknown, from which no voice or person had yet returned. Thetowns they had left were dying. Some of the factories they built had remainedownerless and locked; others had been seized by the local authorities; themachines in both stood still.

She had felt as if a dark map of Colorado were spread before her like atraffic control panel, with a few lights scattered through its mountains. Oneafter another, the lights had gone out. One after another, the men hadvanished. There had been a pattern about it, which she felt, but could notdefine; she had become able to predict, almost with certainty, who would gonext and when; she was unable to grasp the "why?"

Of the men who had once greeted her descent from the cab of an engine onthe platform of Wyatt Junction, only Ted Nielsen was left, still running theplant of Nielsen Motors. "Ted, you won't be the next one to go?" she hadasked him, on his recent visit to New York; she had asked it, trying tosmile. He had answered grimly, "I hope not."

"What do you mean, you hope?—aren't you sure?" He had said slowly,heavily, "Dagny, I've always thought that I'd rather die than stop working.But so did the men who're gone. It seems impossible to me that I could everwant to quit. But a year ago, it seemed impossible that they ever could.Those men were my friends. They knew what their going would do to us, thesurvivors. They would not have gone like that, without a word, leaving to usthe added terror of the inexplicable—unless they had some reason of supremeimportance. A month ago, Roger Marsh, of Marsh Electric, told me that he'dhave himself chained to his desk, so that he wouldn't be able to leave it, nomatter what ghastly temptation struck him. He was furious with anger at themen who'd left. He swore to me that he'd never do it.

'And if it's something that I can't resist,' he said, 'I swear that I'llkeep enough of my mind to leave you a letter and give you some hint of whatit is, so that you won't have to rack your brain in the kind of dread we'reboth feeling now.' That's what he swore. Two weeks ago, he went. He left meno letter. . . . Dagny, I can't tell what I'll do when I see it—whatever itwas that they saw when they went."

It seemed to her that some destroyer was moving soundlessly through thecountry and the lights were dying at his touch—someone, she thought bitterly,who had reversed the principle of the Twentieth Century motor and was nowturning kinetic energy into static.

That was the enemy—she thought, as she sat at her desk in the gatheringtwilight—with whom she was running a race. The monthly report from QuentinDaniels lay on her desk. She could not be certain, as yet, that Daniels wouldsolve the secret of the motor; but the destroyer, she thought, was movingswiftly, surely, at an ever accelerating tempo; she wondered whether, by thetime she rebuilt the motor, there would be any world left to use it.

She had liked Quentin Daniels from the moment he entered her office ontheir first interview. He was a lanky man in his early thirties, with ahomely, angular face and an attractive smile. A hint of the smile remained inhis features at all times, particularly when he listened; it was a look ofgood-natured amusement, as if he were swiftly and patiently discarding theirrelevant in the words he heard and going straight to the point a momentahead of the speaker.

"Why did you refuse to work for Dr. Stadler?" she asked.

The hint of his smile grew harder and more stressed; this was as near ashe came to showing an emotion; the emotion was anger. But he answered in hiseven, unhurried drawl, "You know, Dr. Stadler once said that the first wordof 'Free, scientific inquiry' was redundant.

He seems to have forgotten it. Well, I'll just say that 'Governmentalscientific inquiry' is a contradiction in terms."

She asked him what position he held at the Utah Institute of Technology."Night watchman," he answered. "What?" she gasped. "Night watchman," herepeated politely, as if she had not caught the words, as if there were nocause for astonishment.

Under her questioning, he explained that he did not like any of thescientific foundations left in existence, that he would have liked a job inthe research laboratory of some big industrial concern—"But which one of themcan afford to undertake any long-range work nowadays, and why should they?"—so when the Utah Institute of Technology was closed for lack of funds, he hadremained there as night watchman and sole inhabitant of the place; the salarywas sufficient to pay for his needs—and the Institute's laboratory was there,intact, for his own private, undisturbed use.

"So you're doing research work of your own?"

"That's right."

"For what purpose?"

"For my own pleasure."

"What do you intend to do, if you discover something of scientificimportance or commercial value? Do you intend to put it to some public use?""I don't know. I don't think so."

"Haven't you any desire to be of service to humanity?"

"I don't talk that kind of language, Miss Taggart. I don't think you do,either."

She laughed. "I think we'll get along together, you and I.""We will."

When she had told him the story of the motor, when he had studied themanuscript, he made no comment, but merely said that he would take the job onany terms she named.

She asked him to choose his own terms. She protested, in astonishment,against the low monthly salary he quoted. "Miss Taggart," he said, "ifthere's something that I won't take, it's something for nothing.

I don't know how long you might have to pay me, or whether you'll getanything at all in return. I'll gamble on my own mind. I won't let anybodyelse do it. I don't collect for an intention. But I sure do intend to collectfor goods delivered. If I succeed, that's when I'll skin you alive, becausewhat I want then is a percentage, and it's going to be high, but it's goingto be worth your while."

When he named the percentage he wanted, she laughed. "That is skinning mealive and it will be worth my while. Okay."

They agreed that it was to be her private project and that he was to beher private employee; neither of them wanted to have to deal with theinterference of the Taggart Research Department. He asked to remain in Utah,in his post of watchman, where he had all the laboratory equipment and all

the privacy he needed. The project was to remain confidential between them,until and unless he succeeded.

"Miss Taggart, " he said in conclusion, "I don't know how many years itwill take me to solve this, if ever. But I know that if I spend the rest ofmy life on it and succeed, I will die satisfied." He added, "There's only onething that I want more than to solve it: it's to meet the man who has."

Once a month, since his return to Utah, she had sent him a check and hehad sent her a report on his work. It was too early to hope, but his reportswere the only bright points in the stagnant fog of her days in the office.

She raised her head, as she finished reading his pages. The calendar inthe distance said: September 2. The lights of the city had grown beneath it,spreading and glittering. She thought of Rearden. She wished he were in thecity; she wished she would sec him tonight.

Then, noticing the date, she remembered suddenly that she had to rush hometo dress, because she had to attend Jim's wedding tonight.

She had not seen Jim, outside the office, for over a year. She had not methis fiancee, but she had read enough about the engagement in the newspapers.She rose from her desk in wearily distasteful resignation: it seemed easierto attend the wedding than to bother explaining her absence afterwards.

She was hurrying across the concourse of the Terminal when she heard avoice calling, "Miss Taggart!" with a strange note of urgency and reluctance,together. It stopped her abruptly; she took a few seconds to realize that itwas the old man at the cigar stand who had called.

"I've been waiting to catch sight of you for days. Miss Taggart. I've beenextremely anxious to speak to you." There was an odd expression on his face,the look of an effort not to look frightened.

"I'm sorry," she said, smiling, "I've been rushing in and out of thebuilding all week and didn't have time to stop."

He did not smile. "Miss Taggart, that cigarette with the dollar sign thatyou gave me some months ago—where did you get it?"

She stood still for a moment. "I'm afraid that's a long, complicatedstory," she answered.

"Have you any way of getting in touch with the person who gave it to you?"

"I suppose so—though I'm not too sure. Why?"

"Would he tell you where he got it?"

"I don't know. What makes you suspect that he wouldn't?"

He hesitated, then asked, "Miss Taggart, what do you do when you have totell someone something which you know to be impossible?"

She chuckled. 'The man who gave me the cigarette said that in such a caseone must check one's premises."

"He did? About the cigarette?"

"Well, no, not exactly. But why? What is it you have to tell me?"

"Miss Taggart, I have inquired all over the world. I have checked everysource of information in and about the tobacco industry. I have had thatcigarette stub put through a chemical analysis. There is no plant thatmanufactures that kind of paper. The flavoring elements in that tobacco havenever been used in any smoking mixture I could find. That cigarette wasmachine-made, but it was not made in any factory I know—and I know them all.Miss Taggart, to the best of my knowledge, that cigarette was not madeanywhere on earth."

Rearden stood by, watching absently, while the waiter wheeled the dinnertable out of his hotel room. Ken Danagger had left. The room was half-dark;by an unspoken agreement, they had kept the lights low during their dinner,so that Danagger's face would not be noticed and, perhaps, recognized by thewaiters.

They had had to meet furtively, like criminals who could not be seentogether. They could not meet in their offices or in their homes, only in the

crowded anonymity of a city, in his suite at the Wayne Falkland Hotel. Therecould be a fine of $10,000 and ten years of imprisonment for each of them, ifit became known that he had agreed to deliver to Danagger four thousand tonsof structural shapes of Rearden Metal.

They had not discussed that law, at their dinner together, or theirmotives or the risk they were taking. They had merely talked business.

Speaking clearly and dryly, as he always spoke at any conference, Danaggerhad explained that half of his original order would be sufficient to bracesuch tunnels as would cave in, if he delayed the bracing much longer, and torecondition the mines of the Confederated Coal Company, gone bankrupt, whichhe had purchased three weeks ago—

"It's an excellent property, bat in rotten condition; they had a nastyaccident there last month, cave-in and gas explosion, forty men killed."

He had added, in the monotone of reciting some impersonal, statisticalreport, "The newspapers are yelling that coal is now the most crucialcommodity in the country. They are also yelling that the coal operators areprofiteering on the oil shortage. One gang in Washington is yelling that I amexpanding too much and something should be done to stop me, because I ambecoming a monopoly. Another gang in Washington is yelling that I am notexpanding enough and something should be done to let the government seize mymines, because I am greedy for profits and unwilling to satisfy the public'sneed of fuel. At my present rate of profit, this Confederated Coal propertywill bring back the money I spent on it—in forty-seven years. I have nochildren. I bought it, because there's one customer I don't dare leavewithout coal —and that's Taggart Transcontinental. I keep thinking of whatwould happen if the railroads collapsed." He had stopped, then added, "T

don't know why I still care about that, but I do. Those people inWashington don't seem to have a clear picture of what that would be like. Ihave." Rearden had said, "I'll deliver the Metal. When you need the otherhalf of your order, let me know. I'll deliver that, too."

At the end of the dinner, Danagger had said in the same precise, impassivetone, the tone of a man who knows the exact meaning of his words, "If anyemployee of yours or mine discovers this and attempts private blackmail, Iwill pay it, within reason. But I will not pay, if he has friends inWashington. If any of those come around, then I go to jail." "Then we gotogether," Rearden had said.

Standing alone in his half-darkened room, Rearden noted that the prospectof going to jail left him blankly indifferent. He remembered the time when,aged fourteen, faint with hunger, he would not steal fruit from a sidewalkstand. Now, the possibility of being sent to jail—H this dinner was a felony-meant no more to him than the possibility of being run over by a truck: anugly physical accident without any moral significance.

He thought that he had been made to hide, as a guilty secret, the onlybusiness transaction he had enjoyed in a year's work—and that he was hiding,as a guilty secret, his nights with Dagny, the only hours that kept himalive. He felt that there was some connection between the two secrets, someessential connection which he had to discover. He could not grasp it, hecould not find the words to name it, but he felt that the day when he wouldfind them, he would answer every question of his life.

He stood against the wall, his head thrown back, his eyes closed, andthought of Dagny, and then he felt that no questions could matter to him anylonger. He thought that he would see her tonight, almost hating it, becausetomorrow morning seemed so close and then he would have to leave her—hewondered whether he could remain in town tomorrow, or whether he should leavenow, without seeing her, so that he could wait, so that he could always haveit ahead of him: the moment of closing his hands over her shoulders andlooking down at her face. You're going insane, he thought—but he knew that if

she were beside him through every hour of his days, it would still be thesame, he would never have enough of it, he would have to invent somesenseless form of torture for himself in order to bear it—he knew he wouldsee her tonight, and the thought of leaving without it made the pleasuregreater, a moment's torture to underscore his certainty of the hours ahead.He would leave the light on in her living room, he thought, and hold heracross the bed, and see nothing but the curve of the strip of light runningfrom her waist to her ankle, a single line drawing the whole shape of herlong, slim body in the darkness, then he would pull her head into the light,to see her face, to see it falling back, unresisting, her hair over his arm.her eyes closed, the face drawn as in a look of pain, her mouth open to him.

He stood at the wall, waiting, to let all the events of the day drop awayfrom him, to feel free, to know that the next span of time was his.

When the door of his room flew open without warning, he did not quite hearor believe it, at first. He saw the silhouette of a woman, then of a bellboywho put down a suitcase and vanished. The voice he heard was Lillian's: "Why,Henry! All alone and in the dark?"

She pressed a light switch by the door. She stood there, fastidiouslygroomed, wearing a pale beige traveling suit that looked as if she hadtraveled under glass; she was smiling and pulling her gloves off with the airof having reached home.

"Are you in for the evening, dear?" she asked. "Or were you going out?"

He did not know how long a time passed before he answered, "What are youdoing here?"

"Why, don't you remember that Jim Taggart invited us to his wedding? It'stonight."

"I didn't intend to go to his wedding.""Oh, but I did!"

"Why didn't you tell me this morning, before I left?"

"To surprise you, darling." She laughed gaily. "It's practicallyimpossible to drag you to any social function, but I thought you might do itlike this, on the spur of the moment, just to go out and have a good time, asmarried couples are supposed to. I thought you wouldn't mind it—you've beenstaying overnight in New York so often!"

He saw the casual glance thrown at him from under the brim of herfashionably tilted hat. He said nothing.

"Of course, I was running a risk," she said. "You might have been takingsomebody out to dinner." He said nothing. "Or were you, perhaps, intending toreturn home tonight?"

"No. "

"Did you have an engagement for this evening?""No. "

"Fine." She pointed at her suitcase. "I brought my evening clothes.Will you bet me a corsage of orchids that I can get dressed faster thanyou can?"

He thought that Dagny would be at her brother's wedding tonight; theevening did not matter to him any longer. "I'll take you out, if you wish,"he said, "but not to that wedding."

"Oh, but that's where I want to go! It's the most preposterous event ofthe season, and everybody's been looking forward to it for weeks, all myfriends. I wouldn't miss it for the world. There isn't any better show intown—nor better publicized. It's a perfectly ridiculous marriage, but justabout what you'd expect from Jim Taggart."

She was moving casually through the room, glancing around, as if gettingacquainted with an unfamiliar place. "I haven't been in New York for years,"she said. "Not with you, that is. Not on any formal occasion."

He noticed the pause in the aimless wandering of her eyes, a glance thatstopped briefly on a filled ashtray and moved on. He felt a stab ofrevulsion.

She saw it in his face and laughed gaily. "Oh but, darling, I'm notrelieved! I'm disappointed. I did hope I'd find a few cigarette butts smearedwith lipstick."

He gave her credit for the admission of the spying, even if under cover ofa joke. But something in the stressed frankness of her manner made him wonderwhether she was joking; for the flash of an instant, he felt that she hadtold him the truth. He dismissed the impression, because he could notconceive of it as possible.

"I'm afraid that you'll never be human," she said. "So I'm sure that Ihave no rival. And if I have—which I doubt, darling—I don't think I'll worryabout it, because if it's a person who's always available on call, withoutappointment—well, everybody knows what sort of a person that is."

He thought that he would have to be careful; he had been about to slap herface. "Lillian, I think you know," he said, "that humor of this kind is morethan I can stand."

"Oh, you're so serious!" she laughed. "I keep forgetting it. You're soserious about everything—particularly yourself."

Then she whirled to him suddenly, her smile gone. She had the strange,pleading look which he had seen in her face at times, a look that seemed madeof sincerity and courage: "You prefer to be serious, Henry? All right. Howlong do you wish me to exist somewhere in the basement of your life? Howlonely do you want me to become? I've asked nothing of you. I've let you liveyour life as you pleased. Can't you give me one evening? Oh, I know you hateparties and you'll be bored. But it means a great deal to me. Call it empty,social vanity—I want to appear, for once, with my husband. I suppose younever think of it in such terms, but you're an important man, you're envied,hated, respected and feared, you're a man whom any woman would be proud toshow off as her husband.

You may say it's a low form of feminine ostentation, but that's the formof any woman's happiness. You don't live by such standards, but I do. Can'tyou give me this much, at the price of a few hours of boredom? Can't you bestrong enough to fulfill your obligation and to perform a husband's duty?Can't you go there, not for your own sake, but mine, not because you want togo, but only because I want it?"

Dagny—he thought desperately—Dagny, who had never said a word about hislife at home, who had never made a claim, uttered a reproach or asked aquestion—he could not appear before her with his wife, he could not let hersee him as the husband being proudly shown off—he wished he could die now, inthis moment, before he committed this action—because he knew that he wouldcommit it.

Because he had accepted his secret as guilt and promised himself to takeits consequences—because he had granted that the right was with Lillian, andhe was able to bear any form of damnation, but not able to deny the rightwhen it was claimed of him—because he knew that the reason for his refusal togo, was the reason that gave him no right to refuse—because he heard thepleading cry in his mind: "Oh God, Lillian, anything but that party!" and hedid not allow himself to beg for mercy—

—he said evenly, his voice lifeless and firm: "All right, Lillian. I'llgo. "

The wedding veil of rose-point lace caught on the splintered floor of hertenement bedroom. Cherryl Brooks lifted it cautiously, stepping to look atherself in a crooked mirror that hung on the wall. She had been photographedhere all day, as she had been many times in the past two months. She still

smiled with incredulous gratitude when newspaper people wanted to take herpicture, but she wished they would not do it so often.

An aging sob sister, who had a drippy love column in print and the bitterwisdom of a policewoman in person, had taken Cherryl under her protectionweeks ago, when the girl had first been thrown into press interviews as intoa meat grinder. Today, the sob sister had chased the reporters out, hadsnapped, "All right, all right, beat it!" at the neighbors, had slammedCherryl's door in their faces and had helped her to dress. She was to driveCherryl to the wedding; she had discovered that there was no one else to doit.

The wedding veil, the white satin gown, the delicate slippers and thestrand of pearls at her throat, had cost five hundred times the price of theentire contents of Cherryl' s room. A bed took most of the room's space, andthe rest was taken by a chest of drawers, one chair, and her few dresseshanging behind a faded curtain. The huge hoop skirt of the wedding gownbrushed against the walls when she moved, her slender figure swaying abovethe skirt in the dramatic contrast of a tight, severe, long-sleeved bodice;the gown had been made by the best designer in the city.

"You see, when I got the job in the dime store, I could have moved to abetter room," she said to the sob sister, in apology, "but I don't think itmatters much where you sleep at night, so I saved my money, because I'll needit for something important in the future—"

She stopped and smiled, shaking her head dazedly. "I thought I'd need it,"she said.

"You look fine," said the sob sister. "You can't see much in that allegedmirror, but you're okay."

"The way all this happened, I ... I haven't had time to catch up withmyself. But you see, Jim is wonderful. He doesn't mind it, that I'm only asalesgirl from a dime store, living in a place like this. He doesn't hold itagainst me."

"Uh-huh, " said the sob sister; her face looked grim.

Cherryl remembered the wonder of the first time Jim Taggart had come here.He had come one evening, without warning, a month after their first meeting,when she had given up hope of ever seeing him again. She had been miserablyembarrassed, she had felt as if she were trying to hold a sunrise within thespace of a mud puddle—but Jim had smiled, sitting on her only chair, lookingat her flushed face and at her room. Then he had told her to put on her coat,and he had taken her to dinner at the most expensive restaurant in the city.

He had smiled at her uncertainty, at her awkwardness, at her terror ofpicking the wrong fork, and at the look of enchantment in her eyes.

She had not known what he thought. But he had known that she was stunned,not by the place, but by his bringing her there, that she barely touched thecostly food, that she took the dinner, not as booty from a rich sucker—as allthe girls he knew would have taken it—but as some shining award she had neverexpected to deserve.

He had come back to her two weeks later, and then their dates had grownprogressively more frequent. He would drive up to the dime store at theclosing hour, and she would see her fellow salesgirls gaping at her, at hislimousine, at the uniformed chauffeur who opened the door for her. He wouldtake her to the best night clubs, and when he introduced her to his friends,he would say, "Miss Brooks works in the dime store in Madison Square." Shewould see the strange expressions on their faces and Jim watching them with ahint of mockery in his eyes. He wanted to spare her the need of pretense orembarrassment, she thought with gratitude. He had the strength to be honestand not to care whether others approved of him or not, she thought withadmiration. But she felt an odd, burning pain, new to her, the night she

heard some woman, who worked for a highbrow political magazine, say to hercompanion at the next table, "How generous of Jim!"

Had he wished, she would have given him the only kind of payment she couldoffer in return. She was grateful that he did not seek it. But she felt as iftheir relationship was an immense debt and she had nothing to pay it with,except her silent worship. He did not need her worship, she thought.

There were evenings when he came to take her out, but remained in herroom, instead, and talked to her, while she listened in silence. It alwayshappened unexpectedly, with a kind of peculiar abruptness, as if he had notintended doing it, but something burst within him and he had to speak. Thenhe sat slumped on her bed, unaware of his surroundings and of her presence,yet his eyes jerked to her face once in a while, as if he had to be certainthat a living being heard him.

". . .it wasn't for myself, it wasn't for myself at all—why won't theybelieve me, those people? I had to grant the unions' demands to cut down thetrains—and the moratorium on bonds was the only way I could do it, so that'swhy Wesley gave it to me, for the workers, not for myself. AH the newspaperssaid that I was a great example for all businessmen to follow—a businessmanwith a sense of social responsibility. That's what they said. It's true,isn't it? . . . Isn't it? . . .

What was wrong about that moratorium? What if we did skip a fewtechnicalities? It was for a good purpose. Everyone agrees that anything youdo is good, so long as it's not for yourself. . . . But she won't give mecredit for a good purpose. She doesn't think anybody's any good exceptherself. My sister is a ruthless, conceited bitch, who won't take anyone'sideas but her own. . . . Why do they keep looking at me that way—she andRearden and all those people? Why are they so sure they're right? . . . If Iacknowledge their superiority in the material realm, why don't theyacknowledge mine in the spiritual?

They have the brain, but I have the heart. They have the capacity toproduce wealth, but I have the capacity to love. Isn't mine the greatercapacity? Hasn't it been recognized as the greatest through all the centuriesof human history? Why won't they recognize it? . . . Why are they so surethey're great? . . . And if they're great and I'm not —isn't that exactly whythey should bow to me, because I'm not?

Wouldn't that be an act of true humanity? It takes no kindness to respecta man who deserves respect—it's only a payment which he's earned. To give anunearned respect is the supreme gesture of charity.

. . . But they're incapable of charity. They're not human. They feel noconcern for anyone's need ... or weakness. No concern . . . and no pity . .

She could understand little of it, but she understood that he was unhappyand that somebody had hurt him. He saw the pain of tenderness in her face,the pain of indignation against his enemies, and he saw the glance intendedfor heroes—given to him by a person able to experience the emotion behindthat glance.

She did not know why she felt certain that she was the only one to whom hecould confess his torture. She took it as a special honor, as one more gift.

The only way to be worthy of him, she thought, was never to ask him foranything. He offered her money once, and she refused it, with such a bright,painful flare of anger in her eyes that he did not attempt it again. Theanger was at herself: she wondered whether she had done something to make himthink she was that kind of person.

But she did not want to be ungrateful for his concern, or to embarrass himby her ugly poverty; she wanted to show him her eagerness to rise and justifyhis favor; so she told him that he could help her, if he wished, by helping

her to find a better job. He did not answer. In the weeks that followed, shewaited, but he never mentioned the subject.

She blamed herself: she thought that she had offended him, that he hadtaken it as an attempt to use him.

When he gave her an emerald bracelet, she was too shocked to understand.Trying desperately not to hurt him, she pleaded that she could not accept it."Why not?" he asked. "It isn't as if you were a bad woman paying the usualprice for it. Are you afraid that I'll start making demands? Don't you trustme?" He laughed aloud at her stammering embarrassment. He smiled, with an oddkind of enjoyment, all through the evening when they went to a night club andshe wore the bracelet with her shabby black dress.

He made her wear that bracelet again, on the night when he took her to aparty, a great reception given by Mrs. Cornelias Pope. If he considered hergood enough to bring into the home of his friends, she thought—theillustrious friends whose names she had seen on the inaccessible mountainpeaks that were the society columns of the newspapers—she could not embarrasshim by wearing her old dress. She spent her year's savings on an evening gownof bright green chiffon with a low neckline, a belt of yellow roses and arhinestone buckle. When she entered the stern residence, with the cold,brilliant lights and a terrace suspended over the roofs of skyscrapers, sheknew that her dress was wrong for the occasion, though she could not tellwhy. But she kept her posture proudly straight and she smiled with thecourageous trust of a kitten when it sees a hand extended to play: peoplegathered to have a good time would not hurt anyone, she thought.

At the end of an hour, her attempt to smile had become a helpless,bewildered plea. Then the smile went, as she watched the people around her.She saw that the trim, confident girls had a nasty insolence of manner whenthey spoke to Jim, as if they did not respect him and never had. One of themin particular, a Betty Pope, the daughter of the hostess, kept making remarksto him which Cherryl could not understand, because she could not believe thatshe understood them correctly.

No one had paid any attention to her, at first, except for a fewastonished glances at her gown. After a while, she saw them looking at her.She heard an elderly woman ask Jim, in the anxious tone of referring to somedistinguished family she had missed knowing, "Did you say Miss Brooks ofMadison Square?" She saw an odd smile on Jim's face, when he answered, makinghis voice sound peculiarly clear, "Yes —the cosmetics counter of Raleigh'sFive and Ten." Then she saw some people becoming too polite to her, andothers moving away in a pointed manner, and most of them being senselesslyawkward in simple bewilderment, and Jim watching silently with that oddsmile.

She tried to get out of the way, out of their notice. As she slipped by,along the edge of the room, she heard some man say, with a shrug, "Well, JimTaggart is one of the most powerful men in Washington at the moment." He didnot say it respectfully.

Out on the terrace, where it was darker, she heard two men talking andwondered why she felt certain that they were talking about her.

One of them said, "Taggart can afford to do it, if he pleases" and theother said something about the horse of some Roman emperor named Caligula.

She looked at the lone straight shaft of the Taggart Building rising inthe distance—and then she thought that she understood: these people hated Jimbecause they envied him. Whatever they were, she thought, whatever theirnames and their money, none of them had an achievement comparable to his,none of them had defied the whole country to build a railroad everybodythought impossible. For the first time, she saw that she did have somethingto offer Jim: these people were as mean and small as the people from whom she

had escaped in Buffalo; he was as lonely as she had always been, and thesincerity of her feeling was the only recognition he had found.

Then she walked back into the ballroom, cutting straight through thecrowd, and the only thing left of the tears she had tried to hold back in thedarkness of the terrace, was the fiercely luminous sparkle of her eyes. If hewished to stand by her openly, even though she was only a shop girl, if hewished to flaunt it, if he had brought her here to face the indignation ofhis friends—then it was the gesture of a courageous man defying theiropinion, and she was willing to match his courage by serving as the scarecrowof the occasion.

But she was glad when it was over, when she sat beside him in his car,driving home through the darkness. She felt a bleak kind of relief, Herbattling defiance ebbed into a strange, desolate feeling; she tried not togive way to it. Jim said little; he sat looking sullenly out the car window;she wondered whether she had disappointed him in some manner.

On the stoop of her rooming house, she said to him forlornly, "I'm sorryif I let you down . . ."

He did not answer for a moment, and then he asked, "What would you say ifI asked you to marry me?"

She looked at him, she looked around them—there was a filthy mattresshanging on somebody's window sill, a pawnshop across the street, a garbagepail at the stoop beside them—one did not ask such a question in such aplace, she did not know what it meant, and she answered, "I guess I ... Ihaven't any sense of humor."

"This is a proposal, my dear."

Then this was the way they reached their first kiss—with tears runningdown her face, tears unshed at the party, tears of shock, of happiness, ofthinking that this should be happiness, and of a low, desolate voice tellingher that this was not the way she would have wanted it to happen.

She had not thought about the newspapers, until the day when Jim told herto come to his apartment and she found it crowded with people who hadnotebooks, cameras and flash bulbs. When she saw her picture in the papersfor the first time—a picture of them together, Jim's arm around her—shegiggled with delight and wondered proudly whether every person in the cityhad seen it. After a while, the delight vanished.

They kept photographing her at the dime-store counter, in the subway, onthe stoop of the tenement house, in her miserable room. She would have takenmoney from Jim now and run to hide in some obscure hotel for the weeks oftheir engagement—but he did not offer it.

He seemed to want her to remain where she was. They printed pictures ofJim at his desk, in the concourse of the Taggart Terminal, by the steps ofhis private railway car, at a formal banquet in Washington.

The huge spreads of full newspaper pages, the articles in magazines, theradio voices, the newsreels, all were a single, long, sustained scream—aboutthe "Cinderella Girl" and the "Democratic Businessman."

She told herself not to be suspicious, when she felt uneasy; she toldherself not to be ungrateful, when she felt hurt. She felt it only in a fewrare moments, when she awakened in the middle of the night and lay in thesilence of her room, unable to sleep. She knew that it would take her yearsto recover, to believe, to understand. She was reeling through her days likea person with a sunstroke, seeing nothing but the figure of Jim Taggart asshe had seen him first on the night of his great triumph.

"Listen, kid, " the sob sister said to her, when she stood in her room forthe last time, the lace of the wedding veil streaming like crystal foam fromher hair to the blotched planks of the floor. "You think that if one getshurt in life, it's through one's own sins—and that's true, in the long run.But there are people who'll try to hurt you through the good they see in you—

knowing that it's the good, needing it and punishing you for it. Don't let itbreak you when you discover that."

"I don't think I'm afraid," she said, looking intently straight beforeher, the radiance of her smile melting the earnestness of her glance. "I haveno right to be afraid of anything. I'm too happy. You sec, I always thoughtthat there wasn't any sense in people saying that all you can do in life issuffer. I wasn't going to knuckle down to that and give up.

I thought that things could happen which were beautiful and very great.

I didn't expect it to happen to me—not so much and so soon. But I'll tryto live up to it."

"Money is the root of all evil," said James Taggart. "Money can't buyhappiness. Love will conquer any barrier and any social distance. That may bea bromide, boys, but that's how I feel."

He stood under the lights of the ballroom of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, ina circle of reporters who had closed about him the moment the weddingceremony ended. He heard the crowd of guests beating like a tide beyond thecircle. Cherryl stood beside him, her white gloved hand on the black of hissleeve. She was still trying to hear the words of the ceremony, not quitebelieving that she had heard them.

"How do you feel, Mrs. Taggart?"

She heard the question from somewhere in the circle of reporters. It waslike the jolt of returning to consciousness: two words suddenly madeeverything real to her. She smiled and whispered, choking, "I . . .

I'm very happy . . ."

At opposite ends of the ballroom, Orren Boyle, who seemed too stout forhis full-dress clothes, and Bertram Scudder, who seemed too meager for his,surveyed the crowd of guests with the same thought, though neither of themadmitted that he was thinking it. Orren Boyle half-told himself that he waslooking for the faces of friends, and Bertram Scudder suggested to himselfthat he was gathering material for an article. But both, unknown to eachother, were drawing a mental chart of the faces they saw, classifying themunder two headings which, if named, would have read: "Favor" and "Fear."There were men whose presence signified a special protection extended toJames Taggart, and men whose presence confessed a desire to avoid hishostility—those who represented a hand lowered to pull him up, and those whorepresented a back bent to let him climb. By the unwritten code of the day,nobody received or accepted an invitation from a man of public prominenceexcept in token of one or the other of these motives.

Those in the first group were, for the most part, youthful; they had comefrom Washington. Those in the second group were older; they were businessmen.

Orren Boyle and Bertram Scudder were men who used words as a publicinstrument, to be avoided in the privacy of one's own mind.

Words were a commitment, carrying implications which they did not wish toface. They needed no words for their chart; the classification was done byphysical means: a respectful movement of their eyebrows, equivalent to theemotion of the word "So!" for the first group—and a sarcastic movement oftheir lips, equivalent to the emotion of "Well, well!" for the second. Oneface blew up the smooth working of their calculating mechanisms for a moment:when they saw the cold blue eyes and blond hair of Hank Rearden, theirmuscles tore at the register of the second group in the equivalent of "Oh,boy!" The sum of the chart was an estimate of James Taggart's power. It addedup to an impressive total.

They knew that James Taggart was fully aware of it, when they saw himmoving among his guests. He walked briskly, in a Morse code pattern of shortdashes and brief stops, with a manner of faint irritation, as if conscious ofthe number of people whom his displeasure might worry. The hint of a smile onhis face had a flavor of gloating—

as if he knew that the act of coming to honor him was an act thatdisgraced the men who had come; as if he knew and enjoyed it.

A tail of figures kept trailing and shifting behind him, as if theirfunction were to give him the pleasure of ignoring them. Mr. Mowen flickeredbriefly among the tail, and Dr. Pritchett, and Balph Eubank.

The most persistent one was Paul Larkin. He kept describing circles aroundTaggart, as if trying to acquire a suntan by means of an occasional ray, hiswistful smile pleading to be noticed.

Taggart's eyes swept over the crowd once in a while, swiftly andfurtively, in the manner of a prowler's flashlight; this, in the muscularshorthand legible to Orren Boyle, meant that Taggart was looking for someoneand did not want anyone to know it. The search ended when Eugene Lawson cameto shake Taggart's hand and to say, his wet lower lip twisting like a cushionto soften the blow, "Mr. Mouch couldn't come, Jim, Mr. Mouch is so sorry, hehad a special plane chartered, but at the last minute things came up, crucialnational problems, you know." Taggart stood still, did not answer andfrowned.

Orren Boyle burst out laughing. Taggart turned to him so sharply that theothers melted away without waiting for a command to vanish."What do you think you're doing?" snapped Taggart.

"Having a good time, Jimmy, just having a good time," said Boyle. "Wesleyis your boy, wasn't he?"

"I know somebody who's my boy and he'd better not forget it."

"Who? Larkin? Well, no, I don't think you're talking about Larkin.

And if it's not Larkin that you're talking about, why then I think youought to be careful in your use of the possessive pronouns. I don't mind theage classification, I know I look young for my years, but I'm just allergicto pronouns."

"That's very smart, but you're going to get too smart one of these days."

"If I do, you just go ahead and make the most of it, Jimmy. If."

"The trouble with people who overreach themselves is that they have shortmemories. You'd better remember who got Rearden Metal choked off the marketfor you."

"Why, I remember who promised to. That was the party who then pulled everystring he could lay his hands on to try to prevent that particular directivefrom being issued, because he figured he might need rail of Rearden Metal inthe future."

"Because you spent ten thousand dollars pouring liquor into people youhoped would prevent the directive about the bond moratorium!"

"That's right. So I did. I had friends who had railroad bonds. Andbesides, I have friends in Washington, too, Jimmy. Well, your friends beatmine on that moratorium business, but mine beat yours on Rearden Metal—andI'm not forgetting it. But what the hell!—it's all right with me, that's theway to share things around, only don't you try to fool me, Jimmy. Save theact for the suckers."

"If you don't believe that I've always tried to do my best for you—"

"Sure, you have. The best that could be expected, all things considered.And you'll continue to do it, too, so long as I've got somebody you need—andnot a minute longer. So I just wanted to remind you that I've got my ownfriends in Washington. Friends that money can't buy—just like yours, Jimmy."

"What do you think you mean?"

"Just what you're thinking. The ones you buy aren't really worth a damn,because somebody can always offer them more, so the field's wide open toanybody and it's just like old-fashioned competition again.

But if you get the goods on a man, then you've got him, then there's nohigher bidder and you can count on his friendship. Well, you have friends,and so have I. You have friends I can use, and vice versa.

That's all right with me—what the hell!—one's got to trade something.If we don't trade money—and the age of money is past—then we trade men.""What is it you're driving at?"

"Why, I'm just telling you a few things that you ought to remember.

Now take Wesley, for instance. You promised him the assistant's job in theBureau of National Planning—for double-crossing Rearden, at the time of theEqualization of Opportunity Bill. You had the connections to do it, andthat's what I asked you to do—in exchange for the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule,where I had the connections. So Wesley did his part, and you saw to it thatyou got it all on paper—oh sure, I know that you've got written proof of thekind of deals he pulled to help pass that bill, while he was taking Rearden'smoney to defeat it and keeping Rearden off guard. They were pretty uglydeals. It would be pretty messy for Mr. Mouch, if it all came out in public.So you kept your promise and you got the job for him, because you thought youhad him. And so you did. And he paid off pretty handsomely, didn't he? But itworks only just so long. After a while, Mr. Wesley Mouch might get to be sopowerful and the scandal so old, that nobody will care how he got his startor whom he double-crossed. Nothing lasts forever. Wesley was Rearden's man,and then he was your man, and he might be somebody else's man tomorrow "

"Are you giving me a hint?"

"Why no, I'm giving you a friendly warning. We're old friends.

Jimmy, and I think that that's what we ought to remain. I think we can bevery useful to each other, you and I, if you don't start getting the wrongideas about friendship. Me—I believe in a balance of power."

"Did you prevent Mouch from coming here tonight?"

"Well, maybe I did and maybe I didn't. I'll let you worry about it.

That's good for me, if I did—and still better, if I didn't."

Cherryl's eyes followed James Taggart through the crowd. The faces thatkept shifting and gathering around her seemed so friendly and their voiceswere so eagerly warm that she felt certain there was no malice anywhere inthe room. She wondered why some of them talked to her about Washington, in ahopeful, confidential manner of half sentences, half-hints, as if they wereseeking her help for something secret she was supposed to understand. She didnot know what to say, but she smiled and answered whatever she pleased. Shecould not disgrace the person of "Mrs. Taggart" by any touch of fear.

Then she saw the enemy. It was a tall, slender figure in a gray eveninggown, who was now her sister-in-law.

The pressure of anger in Cherryl's mind was the stored accumulation of thesounds of Jim's tortured voice. She felt the nagging pull of a duty leftundone. Her eyes kept returning to the enemy and studying her intently. Thepictures of Dagny Taggart in the newspapers had shown a figure dressed inslacks, or a face with a slanting hat brim and a raised coat collar. Now shewore a gray evening gown that seemed indecent, because it looked austerelymodest, so modest that it vanished from one's awareness and left one tooaware of the slender body it pretended to cover. There was a tone of blue inthe gray cloth that went with the gun-metal gray of her eyes. She wore nojewelry, only a bracelet on her wrist, a chain of heavy metal links with agreen blue cast.

Cherryl waited, until she saw Dagny standing alone, then tore forward,cutting resolutely across the room. She looked at close range into the gun-metal eyes that seemed cold and intense at once, the eyes that looked at herdirectly with a polite, impersonal curiosity.

"There's something I want you to know," said Cherryl, her voice taut andharsh, "so that there won't be any pretending about it. I'm not going to puton the sweet relative act. I know what you've done to Jim and how you've madehim miserable all his life. I'm going to protect him against you. I'll putyou in your place. I'm Mrs. Taggart. I'm the woman in this family now."

"That's quite all right," said Dagny. "I'm the man."

Cherryl watched her walk away, and ihoug'ritl that Jim had been right:this sister of his was a creature of cold evil who had given her no response,no acknowledgment, no emotion of any kind except a touch of something thatlooked like an astonished, indifferent amusement.

Rearden stood by Lillian's side and followed her when she moved.

She wished to be seen with her husband; he was complying. He did not knowwhether anyone looked at him or not; he was aware of no one around them,except the person whom he could not permit himself to see.

The image still holding his consciousness was the moment when he hadentered this room with Lillian and had seen Dagny looking at them. He hadlooked straight at her, prepared to accept any blow her eyes would choose togive him. Whatever the consequences to Lillian, he would have confessed hisadultery publicly, there and in that moment, rather than commit theunspeakable act of evading Dagny's eyes, of closing his face into a coward'sblankness, of pretending to her that he did not know the nature of hisaction.

But there had been no blow. He knew every shade of sensation everreflected in Dagny's face; he had known that she had felt no shock; he hadseen nothing but an untouched serenity. Her eyes had moved to his, as ifacknowledging the full meaning of this encounter, but looking at him as shewould have looked anywhere, as she looked at him in his office or in herbedroom. It had seemed to him that she had stood before them both, at thedistance of a few steps, revealed to them as simply and openly as the graydress revealed her body.

She had bowed to them, the courteous movement of her head including themboth. He had answered, he had seen Lillian's brief nod, and then he had seenLillian moving away and realized that he had stood with his head bowed for along moment.

He did not know what Lillian's friends were saying to him or what he wasanswering. As a man goes step by step, trying not to think of the length of ahopeless road, so he went moment by moment, keeping no imprint of anything inhis mind. He heard snatches of Lillian's pleased laughter and a tone ofsatisfaction in her voice.

After a while, he noticed the women around him; they all seemed toresemble Lillian, with the same look of static grooming, with thin eyebrowsplucked to a static lift and eyes frozen in static amusement. He noticed thatthey were trying to flirt with him, and that Lillian watched it as if shewere enjoying the hopelessness of their attempts. This, then —he thought—wasthe happiness of feminine vanity which she had begged him to give her, thesewere the standards which he did not live by, but had to consider. He turnedfor escape to a group of men.

He could not find a single straight statement in the conversation of themen; whatever subject they seemed to be talking about never seemed to be thesubject they were actually discussing. He listened like a foreigner whorecognized some of the words, but could not connect them into sentences. Ayoung man, with a look of alcoholic insolence, staggered past the group andsnapped, chuckling, "Learned your lesson, Rearden?" He did not know what theyoung rat had meant; everybody else seemed to know it; they looked shockedand secretly pleased.

Lillian drifted away from him, as if letting him understand that she didnot insist upon his literal attendance. He retreated to a corner of the roomwhere no one would see him or notice the direction of his eyes. Then hepermitted himself to look at Dagny.

He watched the gray dress, the shifting movement of the soft cloth whenshe walked, the momentary pauses sculptured by the cloth, the shadows and thelight. He saw it as a bluish-gray smoke held shaped for an instant into a

long curve that slanted forward to her knee and back to the tip of hersandal. He knew every facet the light would shape if the smoke were rippedaway.

He felt a murky, twisting pain: it was jealousy of every man who spoke toher. He had never felt it before; but he felt it here, where everyone had theright to approach her, except himself.

Then, as if a single, sudden blow to his brain blasted a moment's shift ofperspective, he felt an immense astonishment at what he was doing here andwhy. He lost, for that moment, all the days and dogmas of his past; hisconcepts, his problems, his pain were wiped out; he knew only—as from agreat, clear distance—that man exists for the achievement of his desires, andhe wondered why he stood here, he wondered who had the right to demand thathe waste a single irreplaceable hour of his life, when his only desire was toseize the slender figure in gray and hold her through the length of whatevertime there was left for him to exist.

In the next moment, he felt the shudder of recapturing his mind. He feltthe tight, contemptuous movement of his lips pressed together in token of thewords he cried to himself: You made a contract once, now stick to it. Andthen he thought suddenly that in business transactions the courts of law didnot recognize a contract wherein no valuable consideration had been given byone party to the other. He wondered what made him think of it. The thoughtseemed irrelevant. He did not pursue it.

James Taggart saw Lillian Rearden drift casually toward him at the onemoment when he chanced to be alone in the dim corner between a potted palmand a window. He stopped and waited to let her approach.

He could not guess her purpose, but this was the manner which, in the codehe understood, meant that he had better hear her.

"How do you like my wedding gift, Jim?" she asked, and laughed at his lookof embarrassment. "No, no, don't try to go over the list of things in yourapartment, wondering which one the hell it was. It's not in your apartment,it's right here, and it's a non-material gift, darling."

He saw the half-hint of a smile on her face, the look understood among hisfriends as an invitation to share a secret victory; it was the look, not ofhaving outthought, but of having outsmarted somebody.

He answered cautiously, with a safely pleasant smile, "Your presence isthe best gift you could give me."

"My presence, Jim?"

The lines of his face were shock-bound for a moment. He knew what shemeant, but he had not expected her to mean it.

She smiled openly. "We both know whose presence is the most valuable onefor you tonight—and the unexpected one. Didn't you really think of giving mecredit for it? I'm surprised at you. I thought you had a genius forrecognizing potential friends."

He would not commit himself; he kept his voice carefully neutral.

"Have I failed to appreciate your friendship, Lillian?"

"Now, now, darling, you know what I'm talking about. You didn't expect himto come here, you didn't really think that he is afraid of you, did you? Butto have the others think he is—that's quite an inestimable advantage, isn'tit?"

"I'm . . . surprised, Lillian."

"Shouldn't you say 'impressed'? Your guests are quite impressed. I canpractically hear them thinking all over the room. Most of them are thinking:'If he has to seek terms with Jim Taggart, we'd better toe the line.' And afew are thinking: 'If he's afraid, we'll get away with much more.' This is asyou want it, of course—and I wouldn't think of spoiling your triumph—but youand I are the only ones who know that you didn't achieve it single-handed."

He did not smile; he asked, his face blank, his voice smooth, but with acarefully measured hint of harshness, "What's your angle?"

She laughed. "Essentially—the same as yours, Jim. But speakingpractically—none at all. It's just a favor I've done you, and I need no favorin return. Don't worry, I'm not lobbying for any special interests, I'm notafter squeezing some particular directive out of Mr. Mouch, I'm not evenafter a diamond tiara from you. Unless, of course, it's a tiara of a non-material order, such as your appreciation."

He looked straight at her for the first time, his eyes narrowed, his facerelaxed to the same half-smile as hers, suggesting the expression which, forboth of them, meant that they felt at home with each other: an expression ofcontempt. "You know that I have always admired you, Lillian, as one of thetruly superior women."

"I'm aware of it." There was the faintest coating of mockery spread, likeshellac, over the smooth notes of her voice.

He was studying her insolently. "You must forgive me if I think that somecuriosity is permissible between friends," he said, with no tone of apology."I'm wondering from what angle you contemplate the possibility of certainfinancial burdens—or losses—which affect your own personal interests."

She shrugged. "From the angle of a horsewoman, darling. If you had themost powerful horse in the world, you would keep it bridled down to the Gaitrequired to carry you in comfort, even though this meant the sacrifice of itsfull capacity, even though its top speed would never be seen and its greatpower would be wasted. You would do it—

because if you let the horse go full blast, it would throw you off in notime. . . . However, financial aspects are not my chief concern —nor yours,Jim. "

"t did underestimate you," he said slowly.

"Oh, well, that's an error I'm willing to help you correct. I know thesort of problem he presents to you. I know why you're afraid of him, as youhave good reason to be. But . . . well, you're in business and in politics,so I'll try to say it in your language. A businessman says that he candeliver the goods, and a ward heeler says that he can deliver the vote, isthat right? Well, what I wanted you to know is that I can deliver him, anytime I choose. You may act accordingly."

In the code of his friends, to reveal any part of one's self was to give aweapon to an enemy—but he signed her confession and matched it, when he said,"I wish I were as smart about my sister."

She looked at him without astonishment; she did not find the wordsirrelevant. "Yes, there's a tough one," she said. "No vulnerable point?

No weaknesses?"

"None."

"No love affairs?""God, no!"

She shrugged, in sign of changing the subject; Dagny Taggart was a personon whom she did not care to dwell. "I think I'll let you run along, so thatyou can chat a little with Balph Eubank," she said. "He looks worried,because you haven't looked at him all evening and he's wondering whetherliterature will be left without a friend at court."

"Lillian, you're wonderful!" he said quite spontaneously.

She laughed. "That, my dear, is the non-material tiara I wanted!"

The remnant of a smile stayed on her face as she moved through the crowd,a fluid smile that ran softly into the look of tension and boredom worn byall the faces around her. She moved at random, enjoying the sense of beingseen, her eggshell satin gown shimmering like heavy cream with the motion ofher tall figure.

It was the green-blue spark that caught her attention: it flashed for aninstant under the lights, on the wrist of a thin, naked arm. Then she saw theslender body, the gray dress, the fragile, naked shoulders. She stopped. Shelooked at the bracelet, frowning.

Dagny turned at her approach. Among the many things that Lillian resented,the impersonal politeness of Dagny's face was the one she resented most.

"What do you think of your brother's marriage, Miss Taggart?" she askedcasually, smiling.

"I have no opinion about it."

"Do you mean to say that you don't find it worthy of any thought?""If you wish to be exact—yes, that's what I mean.""Oh, but don't you see any human significance in it?""No. "

"Don't you think that a person such as your brother's bride does deservesome interest?""Why, no."

"I envy you, Miss Taggart. I envy your Olympian detachment. It is, Ithink, the secret of why lesser mortals can never hope to equal your successin the field of business. They allow their attention to be divided—at leastto the extent of acknowledging achievements in other fields."

"What achievements are we talking about?"

"Don't you grant any recognition at all to the women who attain unusualheights of conquest, not in the industrial, but in the human realm?"

"I don't think that there is such a word as 'conquest'—in the humanrealm."

"Oh, but consider, for instance, how hard other women would have had towork—if work were the only means available to them—to achieve what this girlhas achieved through the person of your brother."

"1 don't think she knows the exact nature of what she has achieved."

Rearden saw them together. He approached. He felt that he had to hear it,no matter what the consequences. He stopped silently beside them. He did notknow whether Lillian was aware of his presence; he knew that Dagny was.

"Do show a little generosity toward her, Miss Taggart," said Lillian.

"At least, the generosity of attention. You must not despise the women whodo not possess your brilliant talent, but who exercise their own particularendowments. Nature always balances her gifts and offers compensations—don'tyou think so?"

"I'm not sure I understand you."

"Oh, I'm sure you don't want to hear me become more explicit!""Why, yes, I do."

Lillian shrugged angrily; among the women who were her friends, she wouldhave been understood and stopped long ago; but this was an adversary new toher—a woman who refused to be hurt. She did not care to speak more clearly,but she saw Rearden looking at her.

She smiled and said, "Well, consider your sister-in-law, Miss Taggart.

What chance did she have to rise in the world? None—by your exactingstandards. She could not have made a successful career in business.

She does not possess your unusual mind. Besides, men would have made itimpossible for her. They would have found her too attractive.

So she took advantage of the fact that men have standards which,unfortunately, are not as high as yours. She resorted to talents which, I'msure, you despise. You have never cared to compete with us lesser women inthe sole field of our ambition—in the achievement of power over men."

"If you call it power, Mrs. Rearden—then, no, I haven't."

She turned to go, but Lillian's voice stopped her: "I would like tobelieve that you're fully consistent, Miss Taggart, and fully devoid of humanfrailties. I would like to believe that you've never felt the desire to

flatter—or to offend—anyone. But I see that you expected both Henry and me tobe here tonight."

"Why, no, I can't say that I did, I had not seen my brother's guest list.""Then why are you wearing that bracelet?"

Dagny's eyes moved deliberately straight to hers. "I always wear it.""Don't you think that that's carrying a joke too far?""It was never a joke, Mrs. Rearden."

"Then you'll understand me if I say that I'd like you to give thatbracelet back to me."

"I understand you. But (will not give it back."

Lillian let a moment pass, as if to let them both acknowledge the meaningof their silence. For once, she held Dagny's glance without smiling. "What doyou expect me to think, Miss Taggart?"

"Anything you wish."

"What is your motive?"

"You knew my motive when you gave me the bracelet."

Lillian glanced at Rearden. His face was expressionless; she saw noreaction, no hint of intention to help her or stop her, nothing but anattentiveness that made her feel as if she were standing in a spotlight.

Her smile came back, as a protective shield, an amused, patronizing smile,intended to convert the subject into a drawing-room issue again. "I'm sure,Miss Taggart, that you realize how enormously improper this is."

"No. "

"But surely you know that you are taking a dangerous and ugly risk.""No. "

"You do not take into consideration the possibility of being . . .misunderstood?""No. "

Lillian shook her head in smiling reproach. "Miss Taggart, don't you thinkthat this is a case where one cannot afford to indulge in abstract theory,but must consider practical reality?"

Dagny would not smile. "I have never understood what is meant by astatement of that kind."

"I mean that your attitude may be highly idealistic—as I am sure it is—but, unfortunately, most people do not share your lofty frame of mind andwill misinterpret your action in the one manner which would be most abhorrentto you."

"Then the responsibility and the risk will be theirs, not mine."

"I admire your . . . no, I must not say 'innocence,' but shall I say'purity?' You have never thought of it, I'm sure, but life is not as straightand logical as . . . as a railroad track. It is regrettable, but possible,that your high intentions may lead people to suspect things which . . . well,which I'm sure you know to be of a sordid and scandalous nature."

Dagny was looking straight at her. "I don't."

"But you cannot ignore that possibility."

"I do." Dagny turned to go.

"Oh, but should you wish to evade a discussion if you have nothing tohide?" Dagny stopped. "And if your brilliant—and reckless courage permits youto gamble with your reputation, should you ignore the danger to Mr. Rearden?"

Dagny asked slowly, "What is the danger to Mr. Rearden?"

' Tm sure you understand me."

"I don't."

"Oh, but surely it isn't necessary to be more explicit.""It is—if you wish to continue this discussion."

Lillian's eyes went to Rearden's face, searching for some sign to help herdecide whether to continue or to stop. He would not help her.

"Miss Taggart" she said, "I am not your equal in philosophical altitude. Iam only an average wife. Please give me that bracelet—if you do not wish meto think what I might think and what you wouldn't want me to name."

"Mrs. Rearden, is this the manner and place in which you choose to suggestthat I am sleeping with your husband?"

"Certainly not!" The cry was immediate; it had a sound of panic and thequality of an automatic reflex, like the jerk of withdrawal of a pickpocket'shand caught in action. She added, with an angry, nervous chuckle, in a toneof sarcasm and sincerity that confessed a reluctant admission of her actualopinion, "That would be the possibility farthest from my mind."

"Then you will please apologize to Miss Taggart," said Rearden.

Dagny caught her breath, cutting off all but the faint echo of a gasp.

They both whirled to him. Lillian saw nothing in "his face; Dagny sawtorture.

"It isn't necessary, Hank," she said.

"It is—for me," he answered coldly, not looking at her; he was looking atLillian in the manner of a command that could not be disobeyed.

Lillian studied his face with mild astonishment, but without anxiety oranger, like a person confronted by a puzzle of no significance.

"But of course," she said complaisantly, her voice smooth and confidentagain. "Please accept my apology, Miss Taggart, if I gave you the impressionthat I suspected the existence of a relationship which I would considerimprobable for you and—from my knowledge of his inclinations—impossible formy husband."

She turned and walked away indifferently, leaving them together, as if indeliberate proof of her words.

Dagny stood still, her eyes closed; she was thinking of the night whenLillian had given her the bracelet. He had taken his wife's side, then; hehad taken hers, now. Of the three of them, she was the only one whounderstood fully what this meant.

"Whatever is the worst you may wish to say to me, you will be right."

She heard him and opened her eyes. He was looking at her coldly, his faceharsh, allowing no sign of pain or apology to suggest a hope of forgiveness.

"Dearest, don't torture yourself like that," she said. "I knew that you'remarried. I've never tried to evade that knowledge. I'm not hurt by ittonight,"

Her first word was the most violent of the several blows he felt: she hadnever used that word before. She had never let him hear that particular toneof tenderness. She had never spoken of his marriage in the privacy of theirmeetings—yet she spoke of it here with effortless simplicity.

She saw the anger in his face—the rebellion against pity—the look ofsaying to her contemptuously that he had betrayed no torture and needed nohelp—then the look of the realization that she knew his face as thoroughly ashe knew hers—he closed his eyes, he inclined his head a little, and he saidvery quietly, "Thank you."

She smiled and turned away from him.

James Taggart held an empty champagne glass in his hand and noticed thehaste with which Balph Eubank waved at a passing waiter, as if the waiterwere guilty of an unpardonable lapse. Then Eubank completed his sentence: "—but you, Mr. Taggart, would know that a man who lives on a higher planecannot be understood or appreciated. It's a hopeless struggle—trying toobtain support for literature from a world ruled by businessmen. They arenothing but stuffy, middle-class vulgarians or else predatory savages likeRearden."

"Jim," said Bertram Scudder, slapping his shoulder, "the best compliment Ican pay you is that you're not a real businessman!"

"You're a man of culture, Jim," said Dr. Pritchett, "you're not an ex-ore-digger like Rearden. I don't have to explain to you the crucial need ofWashington assistance to higher education."

"You really liked my last novel, Mr. Taggart?" Balph Eubank kept asking."You really liked it?"

Orren Boyle glanced at the group, on his way across the room, but did notstop. The glance was sufficient to give him an estimate of the nature of thegroup's concerns. Fair enough, he thought, one's got to trade something. Heknew, but did not care to name just what was being traded.

"We arc at the dawn of a new age, " said James Taggart, from above the rimof his champagne glass. "We are breaking up the vicious tyranny of economicpower. We will set men free of the rule of the dollar. We will release ourspiritual aims from dependence on the owners of material means. We willliberate our culture from the stranglehold of the profit-chasers. We willbuild a society dedicated to higher ideals, and we will replace thearistocracy of money by—"

"—the aristocracy of pull," said a voice beyond the group.

They whirled around. The man who stood facing them was Franciscod'Anconia.

His face looked tanned by a summer sun, and his eyes were the exact colorof the sky on the kind of day when he had acquired his tan.

His smile suggested a summer morning. The way he wore his formal clothesmade the rest of the crowd look as if they were masquerading in borrowedcostumes.

"What's the matter?" he asked in the midst of their silence. "Did I saysomething that somebody here didn't know?"

"How did you get here?" was the first thing James Taggart found himselfable to utter.

"By plane to Newark, by taxi from there, then by elevator from my suitefifty-three floors above you."

"I didn't mean . . . that is, what I meant was—"

"Don't look so startled, James. If I land in New York and hear thatthere's a party going on, I wouldn't miss it, would I? You've always saidthat I'm just a party hound."

The group was watching them.

"I'm delighted to see you, of course," Taggart said cautiously, then addedbelligerently, to balance it, "But if you think you're going to—"

Francisco would not pick up the threat; he let Taggart's sentence slideinto mid-air and stop, then asked politely, "If I think what?"

"You understand me very well."

"Yes. I do. Shall I tell you what I think?"

"This is hardly the moment for any—"

"I think you should present me to your bride, James. Your manners havenever been glued to you too solidly—you always lose them in an emergency, andthat's the time when one needs them most."

Turning to escort him toward Cherryl, Taggart caught the faint sound thatcame from Bertram Scudder; it was an unborn chuckle. Taggart knew that themen who had crawled at his feet a moment ago, whose hatred for Franciscod'Anconia was, perhaps, greater than his own, were enjoying the spectaclenone the less. The implications of this knowledge were among the things hedid not care to name.

Francisco bowed to Cherryl and offered his best wishes, as if she were thebride of a royal heir. Watching nervously, Taggart felt relief—

and a touch of nameless resentment, which, if named, would have told himhe wished the occasion deserved the grandeur that Francisco's manner gave itfor a moment.

He was afraid to remain by Francisco's side and afraid to let him looseamong the guests, He backed a few tentative steps away, but Franciscofollowed him, smiling.

"You didn't think I'd want to miss your wedding, James—when you're mychildhood friend and best stockholder?"

"What?" gasped Taggart, and regretted it: the sound was a confession ofpanic.

Francisco did not seem to take note of it; he said, his voice gailyinnocent, "Oh, but of course I know it. I know the stooge behind the stoogebehind every name on the list of the stockholders of d'Anconia Copper. It'ssurprising how many men by the name of Smith and Gomez are rich enough to ownbig chunks of the richest corporation in the world—so you can't blame me if Iwas curious to learn what distinguished persons I actually have among myminority stockholders. I seem to be popular with an astonishing collection ofpublic figures from all over the world—from People's States where youwouldn't think there's any money left at all."

Taggart said dryly, frowning, "There are many reasons—business reasons—whyit is sometimes advisable not to make one's investments directly."

"One reason is that a man doesn't want people to know he's rich.

Another is that he doesn't want them to learn how he got that way."

"I don't know what you mean or why you should object."

"Oh, I don't object at all. I appreciate it. A great many investors —theold-fashioned sort—dropped me after the San Sebastian Mines.

It scared them away. But the modern ones had more faith in me and acted asthey always do—on faith. I can't tell you how thoroughly I appreciate it."

Taggart wished Francisco would not talk so loudly; he wished people wouldnot gather around them. "You have been doing extremely well," he said, in thesafe tone of a business compliment.

"Yes, haven't I? It's wonderful how the stock of d'Anconia Copper hasrisen within the last year. But I don't think I should be too conceited aboutit—there's not much competition left in the world, there's no place to investone's money, if one happens to get rich quickly, and here's d'Anconia Copper,the oldest company on earth, the one that's been the safest bet forcenturies. Just think of what it managed to survive through the ages. So ifyou people have decided that it's the best place for your hidden money, thatit can't be beaten, that it would take a most unusual kind of man to destroyd'Anconia Copper—you were right."

"Well, I hear it said that you've begun to take your responsibilitiesseriously and that you've settled down to business at last. They say you'vebeen working very hard,"

"Oh, has anybody noticed that? It was the old-fashioned investors who madeit a point to watch what the president of a company was doing. The moderninvestors don't find knowledge necessary. I don't think they ever look intomy activities."

Taggart smiled. "They look at the ticker tape of the stock exchange.That tells the whole story, doesn't it?""Yes. Yes, it does—in the long run."

"I must say I'm glad that you haven't been much of a party hound this pastyear. The results show in your work.""Do they? Well, no, not quite yet."

"I suppose," said Taggart, in the cautious tone of an indirect question,"that I should feel flattered you chose to come to this party.""Oh, but I had to come. I thought you were expecting me.""Why, no, I wasn't . . . that is, I mean—"

"You should have expected me, James. This is the great, formal, nose-counting event, where the victims come in order to show how safe it is todestroy them, and the destroyers form pacts of eternal friendship, which

lasts for three months. I don't know exactly which group I belong to, but Ihad to come and be counted, didn't I?"

"What in hell do you think you're saying?" Taggart cried furiously, seeingthe tension on the faces around them.

"Be careful, James. If you try to pretend that you don't understand me,I'm going to make it much clearer."

"If you think it's proper to utter such—"

"I think it's funny. There was a time when men were afraid that somebodywould reveal some secret of theirs that was unknown to their fellows.Nowadays, they're afraid that somebody will name what everybody knows. Haveyou practical people ever thought that that's all it would take to blast yourwhole, big, complex structure, with all your laws and guns—just somebodynaming the exact nature of what you're doing?"

"If you think it's proper to come to a celebration such as a wedding, inorder to insult the host—"

"Why, James, I came here to thank you."

"To thank me?"

"Of course. You've done me a great favor—you and your boys in Washingtonand the boys in Santiago. Only I wonder why none of you took the trouble toinform me about it. Those directives that somebody issued here a few monthsago are choking off the entire copper industry of this country. And theresult is that this country suddenly has to import much larger amounts ofcopper. And where in the world is there any copper left—unless it's d'Anconiacopper? So you see that I have good reason to be grateful."

"1 assure you I had nothing to do with it," Taggart said hastily, "andbesides, the vital economic policies of this country are not determined byany considerations such as you're intimating or—"

"I know how they're determined, James. I know that the deal started withthe boys in Santiago, because they've been on the d'Anconia pay roll forcenturies—well, no, 'pay roll' is an honorable word, it would be more exactto say that d'Anconia Copper has been paying them protection money forcenturies—isn't that what your gangsters call it?

Our boys in Santiago call it taxes. They've been getting their cut onevery ton of d'Anconia copper sold. So they have a vested interest to see mesell as many tons as possible. But with the world turning into People'sStates, this is the only country left where men are not yet reduced todigging for roots in forests for their sustenance—so this is the only marketleft on earth. The boys in Santiago wanted to corner this market. I don'tknow what they offered to the boys in Washington, or who traded what and towhom—but I know that you came in on it somewhere, because you do hold asizable chunk of d'Anconia Copper stock. And it surely didn't displease you—that morning, four months L ago, the day after the directives were issued—tosee the kind of soaring leap that d'Anconia Copper performed on the StockExchange. Why, it practically leaped off the ticker tape and into your face."

"Who gave you any grounds to invent an outrageous story of this kind?"

"Nobody. I knew nothing about it. I just saw the leap on the ticker tapethat morning. That told the whole story, didn't it? Besides, the boys inSantiago slapped a new tax on copper the following week—and they told me thatI shouldn't mind it, not with that sudden rise of my stock. They were workingfor my best interests, they said. They said, why should I care—taking the twoevents together, I was richer than I had been before. True enough. I was."

"Why do you wish to tell me this?"

"Why don't you wish to take any credit for it, James? That's out ofcharacter and out of the policy at which you're such an expert. In an agewhen men exist, not by right, but by favor, one does not reject a gratefulperson, one tries to trap into gratitude as many people as possible. Don'tyou want to have me as one of your men under obligation?"

"I don't know what you're talking about."

"Think what a favor I received without any effort on my part. I wasn'tconsulted, I wasn't informed, I wasn't thought about, everything was arrangedwithout me—and all I have to do now is produce the copper. That was a greatfavor, James—and you may be sure that I will repay it."

Francisco turned abruptly, not waiting for an answer, and started away.Taggart did not follow; he stood, feeling that anything was preferable to onemore minute of their conversation.

Francisco stopped when he came to Dagny. He looked at her for a silentinstant, without greeting, his smile acknowledging that she had been thefirst person he saw and the first one to see him at his entrance into theballroom.

Against every doubt and warning in her mind, she felt nothing but a joyousconfidence; inexplicably, she felt as if his figure in that crowd was a pointof indestructible security. But in the moment when the beginning of a smiletold him how glad she was to see him, he asked, "Don't you want to tell mewhat a brilliant achievement the John Gait Line turned out to be?"

She felt her lips trembling and tightening at once, as she answered, 'Tmsorry if I show that I'm still open to be hurt. It shouldn't shock me thatyou've come to the stage where you despise achievement."

"Yes; don't T? I despised that Line so much that I didn't want to see itreach the kind of end it has reached."

He saw her look of sudden attentiveness, the look of thought rushing intoa breach torn open upon a new direction. He watched her for a moment, as ifhe knew every step she would find along that road, then chuckled and said,"Don't you want to ask me now: Who is John Gait?"

"Why should I want to, and why now?"

"Don't you remember that you dared him to come and claim your Line? Well,he has."

He walked on, not waiting to sec the look in her eyes—a look that heldanger, bewilderment and the first faint gleam of a question mark.

It was the muscles of his own face that made Rearden realize the nature ofhis reaction to Francisco's arrival: he noticed suddenly that he was smilingand that his face had been relaxed into the dim well being of a smile forsome minutes past, as he watched Francisco d'Anconia in the crowd.

He acknowledged to himself, for the first time, all the half-grasped,half-rejected moments when he had thought of Francisco d'Anconia and thrustthe thought aside before it became the knowledge of how much he wanted to seehim again. In moments of sudden exhaustion—

at his desk, with the fires of the furnaces going down in the twilight—

in the darkness of the lonely walk through the empty countryside to hishouse—in the silence of sleepless nights—he had found himself thinking of theonly man who had once seemed to be his spokesman.

He had pushed the memory aside, telling himself: But that one is worsethan all the others!—while feeling certain that this was not true, yet beingunable to name the reason of his certainty. He had caught himself glancingthrough the newspapers to see whether Francisco d'Anconia had returned to NewYork—and he had thrown the newspapers aside, asking himself angrily: What ifhe did return?—would you go chasing him through night clubs and cocktailparties?—what is it that you want from him?

This was what he had wanted—he thought, when he caught himself smiling atthe sight of Francisco in the crowd—this strange feeling of expectation thatheld curiosity, amusement and hope.

Francisco did not seem to have noticed him. Rearden waited, fighting adesire to approach; not after the kind of conversation we had, he thought—what for?—what would I say to him? And then, with the same smiling, light-hearted feeling, the feeling of being certain that it was right, he found

himself walking across the ballroom, toward the group that surroundedFrancisco d'Anconia.

He wondered, looking at them, why these people were drawn to Francisco,why they chose to hold him imprisoned in a clinging circle.

when their resentment of him was obvious under their smiles. Their faceshad the hint of a look peculiar, not to fear, but to cowardice: a look ofguilty anger. Francisco stood cornered against the side edge of a marblestairway, half-leaning, half-sitting on the steps; the informality of hisposture, combined with the strict formality of his clothes, gave him an airof superlative elegance. His was the only face that had the carefree look andthe brilliant smile proper to the enjoyment of a party; but his eyes seemedintentionally expressionless, holding no trace of gaiety, showing—like awarning signal—nothing but the activity of a heightened perceptiveness.

Standing unnoticed on the edge of the group, Rearden heard a woman, whohad large diamond earrings and a flabby, nervous face, ask tensely, "Seniord'Anconia, what do you think is going to happen to the world?"

"Just exactly what it deserves,"

"Oh, how cruel!"

"Don't you believe in the operation of the moral law, raadarae?"Francisco asked gravely. "I do."

Rearden heard Bertram Scudder, outside the group, say to a girl who madesome sound of indignation, "Don't let him disturb you. You know, money is theroot of all evil—and he's the typical product of money."

Rearden did not think that Francisco could have heard it, but he sawFrancisco turning to them with a gravely courteous smile.

"So you think that money is the root of all evil?" said Franciscod'Anconia. "Have you ever asked what is the root of money? Money is a tool ofexchange, which can't exist unless there are goods produced and men able toproduce them. Money is the material shape of the principle that men who wishto deal with one another must deal by trade and give value for value. Moneyis not the tool of the moochers, who claim your product by tears, or of thelooters, who take it from you by force. Money is made possible only by themen who produce.

Is this what you consider evil?

"When you accept money in payment for your effort, you do so only on theconviction that you will exchange it for the product of the effort of others.It is not the moochers or the looters who give value to money. Not an oceanof tears nor all the guns in the world can transform those pieces of paper inyour wallet into the bread you will need to survive tomorrow. Those pieces ofpaper, which should have been gold, are a token of honor—your claim upon theenergy of the men who produce. Your wallet is your statement of hope thatsomewhere in the world around you there are men who will not default on thatmoral principle which is the root of money. Is this what you consider evil?

"Have you ever looked for the root of production? Take a look at anelectric generator and dare tell yourself that it was created by the musculareffort of unthinking brutes. Try to grow a seed of wheat without theknowledge left to you by men who had to discover it for the first time. Tryto obtain your food by means of nothing but physical motions—and you'll learnthat man's mind is the root of all the goods produced and of all the wealththat has ever existed on earth.

"But you say that money is made by the strong at the expense of the weak?What strength do you mean? It is not the strength of guns or muscles. Wealthis the product of man's capacity to think. Then is money made by the man whoinvents a motor at the expense of those who did not invent it? Is money madeby the intelligent at the expense of the fools? By the able at the expense ofthe incompetent? By the ambitious at the expense of the lazy? Money is made—before it can be looted or mooched—made by the effort of every honest man,

each to the extent of his ability. An honest man is one who knows that hecan't consume more than he has produced.

"To trade by means of money is the code of the men of good will.

Money rests on the axiom that every man is the owner of his mind and hiseffort. Money allows no power to prescribe the value of your effort exceptthe voluntary choice of the man who is willing to trade you his effort inreturn. Money permits you to obtain for your goods and your labor that whichthey are worth to the men who buy them, but no more. Money permits no dealsexcept those to mutual benefit by the unforced judgment of the traders. Moneydemands of you the recognition that men must work for their own benefit, notfor their own injury, for their gain, not their loss—the recognition thatthey are not beasts of burden, born to carry the weight of your misery—thatyou must offer them values, not wounds—that the common bond among men is notthe exchange of suffering, but the exchange of goods.

Money demands that you sell, not your weakness to men's stupidity, butyour talent to their reason; it demands that you buy, not the shoddiest theyoffer, but the best that your money can find. And when men live by trade—withreason, not force, as their final arbiter—it is the best product that wins,the best performance, the man of best judgment and highest ability—and thedegree of a man's productiveness is the degree of his reward. This is thecode of existence whose tool and symbol is money. Is this what you considerevil?

"But money is only a tool. It will take you wherever you wish, but it willnot replace you as the driver. It will give you the means for thesatisfaction of your desires, but it will not provide you with desires.

Money is the scourge of the men who attempt to reverse the law ofcausality—the men who seek to replace the mind by seizing the products of themind.

"Money will not purchase happiness for the man who has no concept of whathe wants: money will not give him a code of values, if he's evaded theknowledge of what to value, and it will not provide him with a purpose, ifhe's evaded the choke of what to seek. Money will not buy intelligence forthe fool, or admiration for the coward, or respect for the incompetent. Theman who attempts to purchase the brains of his superiors to serve him, withhis money replacing his judgment, ends up by becoming the victim of hisinferiors. The men of intelligence desert him, but the cheats and the fraudscome flocking to him, drawn by a law which he has not discovered: that no manmay be smaller than his money. Is this the reason why you call it evil?

"Only the man who does not need it, is fit to inherit wealth—the man whowould make his own fortune no matter where he started. If an heir is equal tohis money, it serves him; if not, it destroys him.

But you look on and you cry that money corrupted him. Did it? Or did hecorrupt his money? Do not envy a worthless heir; his wealth is not yours andyou would have done no better with it. Do not think that it should have beendistributed among you; loading the world with fifty parasites instead of one,would not bring back the dead virtue which was the fortune. Money is a livingpower that dies without its root. Money will not serve the mind that cannotmatch it. Is this the reason why you call it evil?

"Money is your means of survival. The verdict you pronounce upon thesource of your livelihood is the verdict you pronounce upon your life. If thesource is corrupt, you have damned your own existence. Did you get your moneyby fraud? By pandering to men's vices or men's stupidity? By catering tofools, in the hope of getting more than your ability deserves? By loweringyour standards? By doing work you despise for purchasers you scorn? If so,then your money will not give you a moment's or a penny's worth of joy. Thenall the things you buy will become, not a tribute to you, but a reproach; notan achievement, but a reminder of shame. Then you'll scream that money is

evil. Evil, because it would not pinch-hit for your self-respect? Evil,because it would not let you enjoy your depravity? Is this the root of yourhatred of money?

"Money will always remain an effect and refuse to replace you as thecause. Money is the product of virtue, but it will not give you virtue and itwill not redeem your vices. Money will not give you the unearned, neither inmatter nor in spirit. Is this the root of your hatred of money?

"Or did you say it's the love of money that's the root of all evil?

To love a thing is to know and love its nature. To love money is to knowand love the fact that money is the creation of the best power within you,and your passkey to trade your effort for the effort of the best among men.It's the person who would sell his soul for a nickel, who is loudest inproclaiming his hatred of money—and he has good reason to hate it. The loversof money are willing to work for it.

They know they are able to deserve it.

"Let me give you a tip on a clue to men's characters: the man who damnsmoney has obtained it dishonorably; the man who respects it has earned it.

"Run for your life from any man who tells you that money is evil.

That sentence is the leper's bell of an approaching looter. So long as menlive together on earth and need means to deal with one another—

their only substitute, if they abandon money, is the muzzle of a gun.

"But money demands of you the highest virtues, if you wish to make it orto keep it. Men who have no courage, pride or self-esteem, men who have nomoral sense of their right to their money and are not willing to defend it asthey defend their life, men who apologize for being rich—will not remain richfor long. They are the natural bait for the swarms of looters that stay underrocks for centuries, but come crawling out at the first smell of a man whobegs to be forgiven for the guilt of owning wealth. They will hasten torelieve him of the guilt—

and of his life, as he deserves.

"Then you will see the rise of the men of the double standard—the men wholive by force, yet count on those who live by trade to create the value oftheir looted money—the men who are the hitchhikers of virtue. In a moralsociety, these are the criminals, and the statutes are written to protect youagainst them. But when a society establishes criminals-by-right and looters-by-law—men who use force to seize the wealth of disarmed victims—then moneybecomes its creators' avenger.

Such looters believe it safe to rob defenseless men, once they've passed alaw to disarm them. But their loot becomes the magnet for other looters, whoget it from them as they got it. Then the race goes, not to the ablest atproduction, but to those most ruthless at brutality. When force is thestandard, the murderer wins over the pickpocket. And then that societyvanishes, in a spread of ruins and slaughter.

"Do you wish to know whether that day is coming? Watch money.

Money is the barometer of a society's virtue. When you see that trading isdone, not by consent, but by compulsion—when you see that in order toproduce, you need to obtain permission from men who produce nothing—when yousee that money is flowing to those who deal, not in goods, but in favors—whenyou see that men get richer by graft and by pull than by work, and your lawsdon't protect you against them, but protect them against you—when you seecorruption being rewarded and honesty becoming a self-sacrifice—you may knowthat your society is doomed. Money is so noble a medium that it does notcompete with guns and it does not make terms with brutality.

It will not permit a country to survive as half-property, half-loot.

"Whenever destroyers appear among men, they start by destroying money, formoney is men's protection and the base of a moral existence. Destroyers seizegold and leave to its owners a counterfeit pile of paper. This kills all

objective standards and delivers men into the arbitrary power of an arbitrarysetter of values. Gold was an objective value, an equivalent of wealthproduced. Paper is a mortgage on wealth that does not exist, backed by a gunaimed at those who are expected to "produce it. Paper is a check drawn bylegal looters upon an account which is not theirs: upon the virtue of thevictims. Watch for the day when it bounces, marked: 'Account overdrawn.'

"When you have made evil the means of survival, do not expect men toremain good. Do not expect them to stay moral and lose their lives for thepurpose of becoming the fodder of the immoral. Do not expect them to produce,when production is punished and looting rewarded. Do not ask, 'Who isdestroying the world?' You are.

"You stand in the midst of the greatest achievements of the greatestproductive civilization and you wonder why it's crumbling around you, whileyou're damning its life-blood—money. You look upon money as the savages didbefore you, and you wonder why the jungle is creeping back to the edge ofyour cities. Throughout men's history, money was always seized by looters ofone brand or another, whose names changed, but whose method remained thesame: to seize wealth by force and to keep the producers bound, demeaned,defamed, deprived of honor. That phrase about the evil of money, which youmouth with such righteous recklessness, comes from a time when wealth wasproduced by the labor of slaves—slaves who repeated the motions oncediscovered by somebody's mind and left unimproved for centuries. So long asproduction was ruled by force, and wealth was obtained by conquest, there waslittle to conquer. Yet through all the centuries of stagnation andstarvation, men exalted the looters, as aristocrats of the sword, asaristocrats of birth, as aristocrats of the bureau, and despised theproducers, as slaves, as traders, as shopkeepers—as industrialists.

"To the glory of mankind, there was, for the first and only time inhistory, a country of money—and I have no higher, more reverent tribute topay to America, for this means: a country of reason, justice, freedom,production, achievement. For the first time, man's mind and money were setfree, and there were no fortunes-by-conquest, but only fortunes-by-work, andinstead of swordsmen and slaves, there appeared the real maker of wealth, thegreatest worker, the highest type of human being—the self-made man—theAmerican industrialist.

"If you ask me to name the proudest distinction of Americans, I wouldchoose—because it contains all the others—the fact that they were the peoplewho created the phrase 'to make money.' No other language or nation had everused these words before; men had always thought of wealth as a staticquantity—to be seized, begged, inherited, shared, looted or obtained as afavor. Americans were the first to understand that wealth has to be created.The words 'to make money' hold the essence of human morality.

"Yet these were the words for which Americans were denounced by the rottedcultures of the looters' continents. Now the looters' credo has brought youto regard your proudest achievements as a hallmark of shame, your prosperityas guilt, your greatest men, the industrialists, as blackguards, and yourmagnificent factories as the product and property of muscular labor, thelabor of whip-driven slaves, like the pyramids of Egypt. The rotter whosimpers that he sees no difference between the power of the dollar and thepower of the whip, ought to learn the difference on his own hide—as, I think,he will.

"Until and unless you discover that money is the root of all good, you askfor your own destruction. When money ceases to be the tool by which men dealwith one another, then men become the tools of men. Blood, whips and guns—ordollars. Take your choice—there is no other—and your time is running out."

Francisco had not glanced at Rearden once while speaking; but the momenthe finished, his eyes went straight to Rearden's face. Rearden stood

motionless, seeing nothing but Francisco d'Anconia across the moving figuresand angry voices between them.

There were people who had listened, but now hurried away, and people whosaid, "It's horrible!"—"It's not true!"—"How vicious and selfish!"—saying itloudly and guardedly at once, as if wishing that their neighbors would hearthem, but hoping that Francisco would not.

"Senor d'Anconia," declared the woman with the earrings, "I don't agreewith you!"

"If you can refute a single sentence I uttered, madame, I shall hear itgratefully."

"Oh, I can't answer you. I don't have any answers, my mind doesn't workthat way, but I don't feel that you're right, so I know that you're wrong.""How do you know it?"

"I feel it. I don't go by my head, but by my heart. You might be good atlogic, but you're heartless."

"Madame, when we'll see men dying of starvation around us, your heartwon't be of any earthly use to save them. And I'm heartless enough to saythat when you'll scream, 'But I didn't know it!'—you will not be forgiven."

The woman turned away, a shudder running through the flesh of her cheeksand through the angry tremor of her voice: "Well, it's certainly a funny wayto talk at a party!"

A portly man with evasive eyes said loudly, his tone of forcedcheerfulness suggesting that his sole concern in any issue was not to let itbecome unpleasant, "If this is the way you feel about money, senor, I thinkI'm darn glad that I've got a goodly piece of d'Anconia Copper stock."

Francisco said gravely, "I suggest that you think twice, sir."

Rearden started toward him—and Francisco, who had not seemed to look inhis direction, moved to meet him at once, as if the others had never existed

"Hello," said Rearden simply, easily, as to a childhood friend; he wassmiling.

He saw his own smile reflected in Francisco's face. "Hello.""I want to speak to you."

"To whom do you think I've been speaking for the last quarter of an hour?

Rearden chuckled, in the manner of acknowledging an opponent's round. "Ididn't think you had noticed me."

"I noticed, when I came in, that you were one of the only two persons inthis room who were glad to see me."

"Aren't you being presumptuous?"

"No-grateful."

"Who was the other person glad to see you?"Francisco shrugged and said lightly, "A woman."

Rearden noticed that Francisco had led him aside, away from the group, inso skillfully natural a manner that neither he nor the others had known itwas being done intentionally.

"I didn't expect to find you here," said Francisco. "You shouldn't havecome to this party."

"Why not?"

"May I ask what made you come?"

"My wife was anxious to accept the invitation."

"Forgive me if I put it in such form, but it would have been more properand less dangerous if she had asked you to take her on a tour ofwhorehouses."

"What danger are you talking about?"

"Mr. Rearden, you do not know these people's way of doing business or howthey interpret your presence here. In your code, but not in theirs, acceptina man's hospitality is a token of good will, a declaration that you and yourhost stand on terms of a civilized relationship.

Don't give them that kind of sanction.""Then why did you come here?"

Francisco shrugged gaily. "Oh, I—it doesn't matter what I do. I'm only aparty hound."

"What are you doing at this party?""Just looking for conquests.""Found any?"

His face suddenly earnest, Francisco answered gravely, almost solemnly,"Yes—what I think is going to be my best and greatest."

Rearden's anger was involuntary, the cry, not of reproach, but of despair:"How can you waste yourself that way?"

The faint suggestion of a smile, like the rise of a distant light, cameinto Francisco's eyes as he asked, "Do you care to admit that you care aboutit?"

"You're going to hear a few more admissions, if that's what you're after.Before I met you, I used to wonder how you could waste a fortune such asyours. Now it's worse, because I can't despise you as I did, as I'd like to,yet the question is much more terrible: How can you waste a mind such asyours ?"

"I don't think I'm wasting it right now."

"I don't know whether there's ever been anything that meant a damn to you—but I'm going to tell you what I've never said to anyone before. When I metyou, do you remember that you said you wanted to offer me your gratitude?"

There was no trace of amusement left in Francisco's eyes; Rearden hadnever faced so solemn a look of respect, "Yes, Mr. Rearden," he answeredquietly.

"I told you that I didn't need it and I insulted you for it. All right,you've won. That speech you made tonight—that was what you were offering me,wasn't it?"

"Yes, Mr. Rearden."

"It was more than gratitude, and I needed the gratitude; it was more thanadmiration, and I needed that, too; it was much more than any word I canfind, it will take me days to think of all that it's given me—but one thing Ido know: I needed it. I've never made an admission of this kind, because I'venever cried for anyone's help. If it amused you to guess that I was glad tosee you, you have something real to laugh about now, if you wish."

"It might take me a few years, but I will prove to you that these are thethings I do not laugh about."

"Prove it now—by answering one question: Why don't you practice what youpreach?"

"Are you sure that I don't?"

"If the things you said are true, if you have the greatness to know it,you should have been the leading industrialist of the world by now."

Francisco said gravely, as he had said to the portly man, but with an oddnote of gentleness in his voice, "I suggest that you think twice, Mr.Rearden."

"I've thought about you more than I care to admit. I have found noanswer."

"Let me give you a hint: If the things I said are true, who is theguiltiest man in this room tonight?""I suppose—James Taggart?"

"No, Mr. Rearden, it is not James Taggart. But you must define the guiltand choose the man yourself."

"A few years ago, I would have said that it's you. I still think thatthat's what I ought to say. But I'm almost in the position of that fool womanwho spoke to you: every reason I know tells me that you're guilty—and yet Ican't feel it."

"You are making the same mistake as that woman, Mr. Rearden, though in anobler form."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean much more than just your judgment of me. That woman and all thoselike her keep evading the thoughts which they know to be good. You keeppushing out of your mind the thoughts which you believe to be evil. They doit, because they want to avoid effort. You do it, because you won't permityourself to consider anything that would spare y6u. They indulge theiremotions at any cost. You sacrifice your emotions as the first cost of anyproblem. They are willing to bear nothing. You are willing to bear anything.They keep evading responsibility. You keep assuming it. But don't you seethat the essential error is the same? Any refusal to recognize reality, forany reason whatever, has disastrous consequences. There are no evil thoughtsexcept one: the refusal to think. Don't ignore your own desires, Mr.

Rearden. Don't sacrifice them. Examine their cause. There is a limit tohow much you should have to bear."

"How did you know this about me?"

"I made the same mistake, once. But not for long."

"I wish—" Rearden began and stopped abruptly.

Francisco smiled. "Afraid to wish, Mr. Rearden?"

"I wish I could permit myself to like you as much as I do."

"I'd give—" Francisco stopped; inexplicably, Rearden saw the look of anemotion which he could not define, yet felt certain to be pain; he sawFrancisco's first moment of hesitation. "Mr. Rearden, do you own anyd'Anconia Copper stock?"

Rearden looked at him, bewildered. "No."

"Some day, you'll know what treason I'm committing right now, but . . .Don't ever buy any d'Anconia Copper stock. Don't ever deal with d'AnconiaCopper in any way."

"Why?"

"When you'll learn the full reason, you'll know whether there's ever beenanything—or anyone—that meant a damn to me, and . . . and how much he didmean."

Rearden frowned: he had remembered something. "I wouldn't deal with yourcompany. Didn't you call them the men of the double standard? Aren't you oneof the looters who is growing rich right now by means of directives?"

Inexplicably, the words did not hit Francisco as an insult, but clearedhis face back into his look of assurance. "Did you think that it was I whowheedled those directives out of the robber-planners?"

"If not, then who did it?"

"My hitchhikers."

"Without your consent?"

"Without my knowledge."

"I'd hate to admit how much I want to believe you—but there's no way foryou to prove it now."

"No? I'll prove it to you within the next fifteen minutes."

"How? The fact remains that you've profited the most from thosedirectives."

"That's true. I've profited more than Mr. Mouch and his gang could everimagine. After my years of work, they gave me just the chance I needed.""Are you boasting?"

"You bet I am!" Rearden saw incredulously that Francisco's eyes had ahard, bright look, the look, not of a party hound, but of a man of action."Mr. Rearden, do you know where most of those new aristocrats keep theirhidden money? Do you know where most of the fair share vultures have investedtheir profits from Rearden Metal?"

"No, but-"

"In d'Anconia Copper stock. Safely out of the way and out of the country.D'Anconia Copper—an old, invulnerable company, so rich that it would last forthree more generations of looting. A company managed by a decadent playboywho doesn't give a damn, who'll let them use his property in any way theyplease and just continue to make money for them—automatically, as did hisancestors. Wasn't that a perfect setup for the looters, Mr. Rearden? Only—what one single point did they miss?"

Rearden was staring at him. "What are you driving at?"

Francisco laughed suddenly. "It's too bad about those profiteers onRearden Metal. You wouldn't want them to lose the money you made for them,would you, Mr. Rearden? But accidents do happen in the world—you know whatthey say, man is only a helpless plaything at the mercy of nature'sdisasters. For instance, there was a fire at the d'Anconia ore docks inValparaiso tomorrow morning, a fire that razed them to the ground along withhalf of the port structures. What time is it, Mr. Rearden? Oh, did I mix mytenses? Tomorrow afternoon, there will be a rock slide in the d'Anconia minesat Orano—no lives lost, no casualties, except the mines themselves. It willbe found that the mines are done for, because they had been worked in thewrong places for months—what can you expect from a playboy's management? Thegreat deposits of copper will be buried under tons of mountain where aSebastian d'Anconia would not be able to reclaim them in less than threeyears, and a People's State will never reclaim them at all. When thestockholders begin to look into things, they will find that the mines atCampos, at San Felix, at Las Heras have been worked in exactly the samemanner and have been running at a loss for over a year, only the playboyjuggled the books and kept it out of the newspapers.

Shall I tell you what they will discover about the management of thed'Anconia foundries? Or of the d'Anconia ore fleet? But all these discoverieswon't do the stockholders any good anyway, because the stock of d'AnconiaCopper will have crashed tomorrow morning, crashed like an electric bulbagainst concrete, crashed like an express elevator, spattering pieces ofhitchhikers all over the gutters!"

The triumphant rise of Francisco's voice merged with a matching sound:Rearden burst out laughing.

Rearden did not know how long that moment lasted or what he had felt, ithad been like a blow hurling him into another kind of consciousness, then asecond blow returning him to his own—all that was left, as at the awakeningfrom a narcotic, was the feeling that he had known some immense kind offreedom, never to be matched in reality. This was like the Wyatt fire again,he thought, this was his secret danger.

He found himself backing away from Francisco d'Anconia, Francisco stoodwatching him intently, and looked as if he had been watching him all throughthat unknown length of time.

"There are no evil thoughts, Mr. Rearden," Francisco said softly, "exceptone: the refusal to think."

"No," said Rearden; it was almost a whisper, he had to keep his voicedown, he was afraid that he would hear himself scream it, "no ... if thisis the key to you, no, don't expect me to cheer you . . .

you didn't have the strength to fight them . . . you chose the easiest,most vicious way . . . deliberate destruction . . . the destruction of anachievement you hadn't produced and couldn't match. . . ."

'That's not what you'll read in the newspapers tomorrow. There won't beany evidence of deliberate destruction. Everything happened in the normal,explicable, justifiable course of plain incompetence. Incompetence isn'tsupposed to be punished nowadays, is it? The boys in Buenos Aires and theboys in Santiago will probably want to hand me a subsidy, by way ofconsolation and reward. There's still a great part of the d'Anconia Copper

Company left, though a great part of it is gone for good. Nobody will saythat I've done it intentionally. You may think what you wish."

"I think you're the guiltiest man in this room," said Rearden quietly,wearily; even the fire of his anger was gone; he felt nothing but theemptiness left by the death of a great hope. "I think you're worse thananything I had supposed. ..."

Francisco looked at him with a strange half-smile of serenity, theserenity of a victory over pain, and did not answer.

It was their silence that let them hear the voices of the two men whostood a few steps away, and they turned to look at the speakers.

The stocky, elderly man was obviously a businessman of the conscientious,unspectacular kind. His formal dress suit was of good quality, but of a cutfashionable twenty years before, with the faintest tinge of green at theseams; he had had few occasions to wear it. His shirt studs wereostentatiously too large, but it was the pathetic ostentation of an heirloom,intricate pieces of old-fashioned workmanship, that had probably come to himthrough four generations, like his business.

His face had the expression which, these days, was the mark of an honestman: an expression of bewilderment. He was looking at his companion, tryinghard—conscientiously, helplessly, hopelessly—to understand.

His companion was younger and shorter, a small man with lumpy flesh, witha chest thrust forward and the thin points of a mustache thrust up. He wassaying, in a tone of patronizing boredom, "Well, I don't know. All of you arecrying about rising costs, it seems to be the stock complaint nowadays, it'sthe usual whine of people whose profits are squeezed a little. I don't know,we'll have to see, we'll have to decide whether we'll permit you to make anyprofits or not."

Rearden glanced at Francisco—and saw a face that went beyond hisconception of what the purity of a single purpose could do to a humancountenance: it was the most merciless face one could ever be permitted tosee. He had thought of himself as ruthless, but he knew that he could notmatch this level, naked, implacable look, dead to all feeling but justice.Whatever the rest of him—thought Rearden—the man who could experience thiswas a giant.

It was only a moment. Francisco turned to him, his face normal, and saidvery quietly, "I've changed my mind, Mr. Rearden. I'm glad that you came tothis party. I want you to see this."

Then, raising his voice, Francisco said suddenly, in the gay, loose,piercing tone of a man of complete irresponsibility, "You won't grant me thatloan, Mr. Rearden? It puts me on a terrible spot. I must get the money—I mustraise it tonight—I must raise it before the Stock Exchange opens in themorning, because otherwise—"

He did not have to continue, because the little man with the mustache wasclutching at his arm.

Rearden had never believed that a human body could change dimensionswithin one's sight, but he saw the man shrinking in weight, in posture, inform, as if the air were let out of his lumps, and what had been an arrogantruler was suddenly a piece of scrap that could not be a threat to anyone.

"Is ... is there something wrong, Senor d'Anconia? I mean, on ... onthe Stock Exchange?"

Francisco jerked his finger to his lips, with a frightened glance.

"Keep quiet," he whispered. "For God's sake, keep quiet!"

The man was shaking. "Something's . . . wrong?"

"You don't happen to own any d'Anconia Copper stock, do you?"

The man nodded, unable to speak. "Oh my, that's too bad! Well, listen,I'll tell you, if you give me your word of honor that you won't repeat it toanyone, You don't want to start a panic."

"Word of honor . . ." gasped the man.

"What you'd better do is run to your stockbroker and sell as fast as youcan—because things haven't been going too well for d'Anconia Copper, I'mtrying to raise some money, but if I don't succeed, you'll be lucky if you'llhave ten cents on your dollar tomorrow morning—

oh my! I forgot that you can't reach your stockbroker before tomorrowmorning—well, it's too bad, but—"

The man was running across the room, pushing people out of his way, like atorpedo shot into the crowd.

"Watch," said Francisco austerely, turning to Rearden.

The man was lost in the crowd, they could not see him, they could not tellto whom he was selling his secret or whether he had enough of his cunningleft to make it a trade with those who held favors—but they saw the wake ofhis passage spreading through the room, the sudden cuts splitting the crowd,like the first few cracks, then like the accelerating branching that runsthrough a wall about to crumble, the streaks of emptiness slashed, not by ahuman touch, but by the impersonal breath of terror.

There were the voices abruptly choked off, the pools of silence, thensounds of a different nature; the rising, hysterical inflections of uselesslyrepeated questions, the unnatural whispers, a woman's scream, the few spaced,forced giggles of those still trying to pretend that nothing was happening.

There were spots of immobility in the motion of the crowd, like spreadingblotches of paralysis; there was a sudden stillness, as if a motor had beencut off; then came the frantic, jerking, purposeless, rudderless movement ofobjects bumping down a hill by the blind mercy of gravitation and of everyrock they hit on the way. People were running out, running to telephones,running to one another, clutching or pushing the bodies around them atrandom. These men, the most powerful men in the country, those who held,unanswerable to any power, the power over every man's food and every man'senjoyment of his span of years on earth—these men had become a pile ofrubble, clattering in the wind of panic, the rubble left of a structure whenits key pillar has been cut.

James Taggart, his face indecent in its exposure of emotions whichcenturies had taught men to keep hidden, rushed up to Francisco and screamed,"Is it true?"

"Why, James," said Francisco, smiling, "what's the matter? Why do you seemto be upset? Money is the root of all evil—so I just got tired of beingevil."

Taggart ran toward the main exit, yelling something to Orren Boyle on theway. Boyle nodded and kept on nodding, with the eagerness and humility of aninefficient servant, then darted of in another direction. Cherryl, herwedding veil coiling like a crystal cloud upon the air, as she ran after him,caught Taggart at the door. "Jim, what's the matter?" He pushed her aside andshe fell against the stomach of Paul Larkin, as Taggart rushed out.

Three persons stood immovably still, like three pillars spaced through theroom, the lines of their sight cutting across the spread of the wreckage:Dagny, looking at Francisco—Francisco and Rearden, looking at each other.

CHAPTER IIIWHITE BLACKMAIL

"What time is it?"

It's running out, thought Rearden—but he answered, "I don't know, Not yetmidnight," and remembering his wrist watch, added, "Twenty of.""I'm going to take a train home," said Lillian.

He heard the sentence, but it had to wait its turn to enter the crowdedpassages to his consciousness. He stood looking absently at the living roomof his suite, a few minutes' elevator ride away from the party. In a moment,he answered automatically, "At this hour?"

"It's still early. There are plenty of trains running."

"You're welcome to stay here, of course."

"No, I think I prefer to go home." He did not argue. "What about you,Henry? Do you intend going home tonight?"

"No." He added, "I have business appointments here tomorrow.""As you wish."

She shrugged her evening wrap off her shoulders, caught it on her arm andstarted toward the door of his bedroom, but stopped.

"I hate Francisco d'Anconia," she said tensely. "Why did he have to cometo that party? And didn't he know enough to keep his mouth shut, at leasttill tomorrow morning?" He did not answer. "It's monstrous—what he's allowedto happen to his company. Of course, he's nothing but a rotten playboy—still,a fortune of that size is a responsibility, there's a limit to the negligencea man can permit himself!" He glanced at her face: it was oddly tense, thefeatures sharpened, making her look older. "He owed a certain duty to hisstockholders, didn't he?

. . . Didn't he, Henry?"

"Do you mind if we don't discuss it?"

She made a tightening, sidewise movement with her lips, the equivalent ofa shrug, and walked into the bedroom.

He stood at the window, looking down at the streaming roofs ofautomobiles, letting his eyes rest on something while his faculty of sightwas disconnected. His mind was still focused on the crowd in the ballroomdownstairs and on two figures in that crowd. But as his living room remainedon the edge of his vision, so the sense of some action he had to performremained on the edge of his consciousness. He grasped it for a moment—it wasthe fact that he had to remove his evening clothes—

but farther beyond the edge there was the feeling of reluctance to undressin the presence of a strange woman in his bedroom, and he forgot it again inthe next moment.

Lillian came out, as trimly groomed as she had arrived, the beigetraveling suit outlining her figure with efficient tightness, the hat tiltedover half a head of hair set in waves. She carried her suitcase, swinging ita little, as if in demonstration of her ability to carry it.

He reached over mechanically and took the suitcase out of her hand.

"What are you doing?" she asked.

"I'm going to take you to the station."

"Like this? You haven't changed your clothes."

"It doesn't matter."

"You don't have to escort me. I'm quite able to find my own way. If youhave business appointments tomorrow, you'd better go to bed."

He did not answer, but walked to the door, held it open for her andfollowed her to the elevator.

They remained silent when they rode in a taxicab to the station. At suchmoments as he remembered her presence, he noticed that she sat efficiently

straight, almost flaunting the perfection of her poise; she seemed alertlyawake and contented, as if she were starting out on a purposeful journey ofearly morning.

The cab stopped at the entrance to the Taggart Terminal. The bright lightsflooding the great glass doorway transformed the lateness of the hour into asense of active, timeless security. Lillian jumped lightly out of the cab,saying, "No, no, you don't have to get out, drive on back.

Will you be home for dinner tomorrow—or next month?"

"I'll telephone you," he said.

She waved her gloved hand at him and disappeared into the lights of theentrance. As the cab started forward, he gave the driver the address ofDagny's apartment.

The apartment was dark when he entered, but the door to her bedroom washalf-open and he heard her voice saying, "Hello, Hank."He walked in, asking, "Were you asleep?""No. "

He switched on the light. She lay in bed, her head propped by the pillow,her hair falling smoothly to her shoulders, as if she had not moved for along time; but her face was untroubled. She looked like a schoolgirl, withthe tailored collar of a pale blue nightgown lying severely high at the baseof her throat; the nightgown's front was a deliberate contrast to theseverity, a spread of pale blue embroidery that looked luxuriously adult andfeminine.

He sat down on the edge of the bed—and she smiled, noticing that the sternformality of his full dress clothes made his action so simply, naturallyintimate. He smiled in answer. He had come, prepared to reject theforgiveness she had granted him at the party, as one rejects a favor from toogenerous an adversary. Instead, he reached out suddenly and moved his handover her forehead, down the line of her hair, in a gesture of protectivetenderness, in the sudden feeling of how delicately childlike she was, thisadversary who had borne the constant challenge of his strength, but whoshould have had his protection.

"You're carrying BO much," he said, "and it's I who make it harder for you

"No, Hank, you don't and you know it."

"I know that you have the strength not to let it hurt you, but it's astrength I have no right to call upon. Yet I do, and I have no solution, noatonement to offer. I can only admit that I know it and that there's no way Ican ask you to forgive me."

"There's nothing to forgive."

"I had no right to bring her into your presence."

"It did not hurt me. Only . . ."

"Yes?"

". . . only seeing the way you suffered . . . was hard to see."

"I don't think that suffering makes up for anything, but whatever I felt,I didn't suffer enough, if there's one thing I loathe, it's to speak of myown suffering—that should be no one's concern but mine. But if you want toknow, since you know it already—yes, it was hell for me. And I wish it wereworse. At least, I'm not letting myself get away with it."

He said it sternly, without emotion, as an impersonal verdict uponhimself. She smiled, in amused sadness, she took his hand and pressed it toher lips, and shook her head in rejection of the verdict, holding her facehidden against his hand.

"What do you mean?" he asked softly.

"Nothing . . ." Then she raised her head and said firmly, "Hank, I knewyou were married. I knew what I was doing. I chose to do it.

There's nothing that you owe me, no duty that you have to consider."

He shook his head slowly, in protest.

"Hank, I want nothing from you except what you wish to give me.

Do you remember that you called me a trader once? I want you to come to meseeking nothing but your own enjoyment. So long as you wish to remainmarried, whatever your reason, I have no right to resent it. My way oftrading is to know that the joy you give me is paid for by the joy you getfrom me—not by your suffering or mine. I don't accept sacrifices and I don'tmake them. If you asked me for more than you meant to me, I would refuse. Ifyou asked me to give up the railroad, I'd leave you. If ever the pleasure ofone has to be bought by the pain of the other, there better be no trade atall. A trade by which one gains and the other loses is a fraud. You don't doit in business, Hank.

Don't do it in your own life."

Like a dim sound track under her words, he was hearing the words said tohim by Lillian; he was seeing the distance between the two, the difference inwhat they sought from him and from life.

"Dagny, what do you think of my marriage?"

"I have no right to think of it."

"You must have wondered about it."

"I did . . . before I came to Ellis Wyatt's house. Not since.""You've never asked me a question about it.""And won't."

He was silent for a moment, then said, looking straight at her,underscoring his first rejection of the privacy she had always granted him,"There's one thing I want you to know: I have not touched her since . . .Ellis Wyatt's house."

"I'm glad."

"Did you think I could?"

"I've never permitted myself to wonder about that."

"Dagny, do you mean that if I had, you . . . you'd accept that, too?""Yes."

"You wouldn't hate it?"

"I'd hate it more than I can tell you. But if that were your choice, Iwould accept it. I want you, Hank."

He took her hand and raised it to his lips, she felt the moment's strugglein his body, in the sudden movement with which he came down, half-collapsing,and let his mouth cling to her shoulder. Then he pulled her forward, hepulled the length of her body in the pale blue nightgown to lie stretchedacross his knees, he held it with an unsmiling violence, as if in hatred forher words and as if they were the words he had most wanted to hear.

He bent his face down to hers and she heard the question that had comeagain and again in the nights of the year behind them, always torn out of himinvoluntarily, always as a sudden break that betrayed his constant, secrettorture: "Who was your first man?"

She strained back, trying to draw away from him, but he held her.

"No, Hank," she said, her face hard.

The brief, taut movement of his lips was a smile. "I know that you won'tanswer it, but I won't stop asking—because that is what I'll never accept.""Ask yourself why you won't accept it."

He answered, his hand moving slowly from her breasts to her knees, as ifstressing his ownership and hating it, "Because . . . the things you'vepermitted me to do . . .1 didn't think you could, not ever, not even for me. . . but to find that you did, and more: that you had permitted another man,had wanted him to, had—"

"Do you understand what you're saying? That you've never accepted mywanting you, either—you've never accepted that I should want you, just as Ishould have wanted him, once."

He said, his voice low, "That's true."

She tore herself away from him with a brusque, twisting movement, shestood up, but she stood looking down at him with a faint smile, and she saidsoftly, "Do you know your only real guilt? With the greatest capacity for it,you've never learned to enjoy yourself. You've always rejected your ownpleasure too easily. You've been willing to bear too much."

"He said that, too."

"Who?"

"Francisco d'Anconia."

He wondered why he had the impression that the name shocked her and thatshe answered an instant too late, "He said that to you?""We were talking about quite a different subject."

In a moment, she said calmly, "I saw you talking to him. Which one of youwas insulting the other, this time?"

"We weren't. Dagny, what do you think of him?"

"I think that he's done it intentionally—that smash-up we're in for,tomorrow."

"I know he has. Still, what do you think of him as a person?""I don't know. I ought to think that he's the most depraved person I'veever met."

"You ought to? But you don't?"

"No. I can't quite make myself feel certain of it."

He smiled. "That's what's strange about him. I know that he's a liar, aloafer, a cheap playboy, the most viciously irresponsible waste of a humanbeing I ever imagined possible. Yet, when I look at him, I feel that if everthere was a man to whom I would entrust my life, he's the one."

She gasped. "Hank, are you saying that you like him?"

"I'm saying that I didn't know what it meant, to like a man, I didn't knowhow much I missed it—until I met him, "

"Good God, Hank, you've fallen for him!"

"Yes—I think I have." He smiled. "Why does it frighten you?"

"Because . . . because I think he's going to hurt you in some terrible way. . . and the more you see in him, the harder it will be to bear . . . and itwill take you a long time to get over it, if ever. . . .

I feel that I ought to warn you against him, but I can't—because I'mcertain of nothing about him, not even whether he's the greatest or thelowest man on earth."

"I'm certain of nothing about him—except that I like him."

"But think of what' he's done. It's not Jim and Boyle that he's hurt, it'syou and me and Ken Danagger and the rest of us, because Jim's gang willmerely take it out on us—and it's going to be another disaster, like theWyatt fire."

"Yes . . . yes, like the Wyatt fire. But, you know, I don't think I caretoo much about that. What's one more disaster? Everything's going anyway,it's only a question of a little faster or a little slower, all that's leftfor us ahead is to keep the ship afloat as long as we can and then go downwith it."

"Is that his excuse for himself? Is that what he's made you feel?""No. Oh no! That's the feeling I lose when I speak to him. The strangething is what he does make me feel.""What?""Hope."

She nodded, in helpless wonder, knowing that she had felt it, too.

"I don't know why," he said. "But I look at people and they seem to bemade of nothing but pain. He's not. You're not. That terrible hopelessnessthat's all around us, I lose it only in his presence. And here.

Nowhere else."

She came back to him and slipped down to sit at his feet, pressing herface to his knees. "Hank, we still have so much ahead of us . . .and so much right now. ..."

He looked at the shape of pale blue silk huddled against the black of hisclothes—he bent down to her—he said, his voice low, "Dagny . . .

the things I said to you that morning in Ellis Wyatt's house ... I thinkI was lying to myself."

"I know it."

Through a gray drizzle of rain, the calendar above the roofs said:September 3, and a clock on another tower said: 10:40, as Rearden rode backto the Wayne-Falkland Hotel. The cab's radio was spitting out shrilly thesounds of a panic-tinged voice announcing the crash of d'Anconia Copper.

Rearden leaned wearily against the seat: the disaster seemed to be no morethan a stale news story read long ago. He felt nothing, except anuncomfortable sense of impropriety at finding himself out in the morningstreets, dressed in evening clothes. He felt no desire to return from theworld he had left to the world he saw drizzling past the windows of the taxi.

He turned the key in the door of his hotel suite, hoping to get back to adesk as fast as possible and have to see nothing around him.

They hit his consciousness together: the breakfast table—the door to hisbedroom., open upon the sight of a bed that had been slept in—and Lillian'svoice saying, "Good morning, Henry."

She sat in an armchair, wearing the suit she had worn yesterday, withoutthe jacket or hat; her white blouse looked smugly crisp. There were remnantsof a breakfast on the table. She was smoking a cigarette, with the air andpose of a long, patient vigil.

As he stood still, she took the time to cross her legs and settle downmore comfortably, then asked, "Aren't you going to say anything, Henry?"

He stood like a man in military uniform at some official proceedings whereemotions could not be permitted to exist. "It is for you to speak."

"Aren't you going to try to justify yourself?"

"No. "

"Aren't you going to start begging my forgiveness?"

"There is no reason why you should forgive me. There is nothing for me toadd. You know the truth. Now it is up to you."

She chuckled, stretching, rubbing her shoulder blades against the chair'sback. "Didn't you expect to be caught, sooner or later?" she asked. "If a manlike you stays pure as a monk for over a year, didn't you think that I mightbegin to suspect the reason? It's funny, though, that that famous brain ofyours didn't prevent you from getting caught as simply as this." She waved atthe room, at the breakfast table. "I felt certain that you weren't going toreturn here, last night. And it wasn't difficult or expensive at all to findout from a hotel employee, this morning, that you haven't spent a night inthese rooms in the past year."

He said nothing.

"The man of stainless steel!" She laughed. "The man of achievement andhonor who's so much better than the rest of us! Does she dance in the chorusor is she a manicurist in an exclusive barber shop patronized bymillionaires ?"

He remained silent.

"Who is she, Henry?"

"I won't answer that."

"I want to know."

"You're not going to."

"Don't you think it's ridiculous, your playing the part of a gentlemanwho's protecting the lady's name—or of any sort of gentleman, from now on?Who is she?"

"I said I won't answer."

She shrugged. "I suppose it makes no difference. There's only one standardtype for the one standard purpose. I've always known that under that asceticlook of yours you were a plain, crude sensualist who sought nothing from awoman except an animal satisfaction which I pride myself on not having givenyou. I knew that your vaunted sense of honor would collapse some day and youwould be drawn to the lowest, cheapest type of female, just like any othercheating husband."

She chuckled. "That great admirer of yours, Miss Dagny Taggart, wasfurious at me for the mere hint of a suggestion that her hero wasn't as pureas his stainless, non-corrosive rail. And she was naive enough to imaginethat I could suspect her of being the type men find attractive for arelationship in which what they seek is most notoriously not brains. I knewyour real nature and inclinations. Didn't I?" He said nothing. "Do you knowwhat [ think of you now?"

"You have the right to condemn me in any way you wish."

She laughed. "The great man who was so contemptuous—in business—ofweaklings who trimmed corners or fell by the wayside, because they couldn'tmatch his strength of character and steadfastness of purpose! How do you feelabout it now?"

"My feelings need not concern you. You have the right to decide what youwish me to do. I will agree to any demand you make, except one: don't ask meto give it up."

"Oh, I wouldn't ask you to give it up! I wouldn't expect you to changeyour nature. This is your true level—under all that self-made grandeur of aknight of industry who rose by sheer genius from the ore mine gutters tofinger bowls and white tie! It fits you welt, that white tie, to come home inat eleven o'clock in the morning! You never rose out of the ore mines, that'swhere you belong—all of you self-made princes of the cash register—in thecorner saloon on Saturday night, with the traveling salesmen and the dance-hall girls!"

"Do you wish to divorce me?"

"Oh, wouldn't you like that! Wouldn't that be a smart trade to pull!Don't you suppose I know that you've wanted to divorce me since the firstmonth of our marriage?"

"If that is what you thought, why did you stay with me?"

She answered severely, "It's a question you have lost the right to ask."

"That's true," he said, thinking that only one conceivable reason, herlove for him, could justify her answer.

"No, I'm not going to divorce you. Do you suppose that I will allow yourromance with a floozie to deprive me of my home, my name, my social position?I shall preserve such pieces of my life as I can, whatever does not rest onso shoddy a foundation as your fidelity. Make no mistake about it: I shallnever give you a divorce. Whether you like it or not, you're married andyou'll stay married."

"I will, if that is what you wish."

"And furthermore, I will not consider—incidentally, why don't you sitdown?"

He remained standing. "Please say what you have to say."

"I will not consider any unofficial divorce, such as a separation. You maycontinue your love idyll in the subways and basements where it belongs, butin the eyes of the world I will expect you to remember that I am Mrs. HenryRearden. You have always proclaimed such an exaggerated devotion to honesty—now let me see you be condemned to the life of the hypocrite that you reallyare. I will expect you to maintain your residence at the home which isofficially yours, but will now be mine."

"If you wish."

She leaned back loosely, in a manner of untidy relaxation, her legs spreadapart, her arms resting in two strict parallels on the arms of the chair—likea judge who could permit himself to be sloppy.

"Divorce?" she said, chuckling coldly. "Did you think you'd get off aseasily as that? Did you think you'd get by at the price of a few of yourmillions tossed off as alimony? You're so used to purchasing whatever youwish by the simple means of your dollars, that you cannot conceive of thingsthat are non-commercial, non-negotiable, non-subject to any kind of trade.You're unable to believe that there may exist a person who feels no concernfor money. You cannot imagine what that means.

Well, I think you're going to learn. Oh yes, of course you'll agree to anydemand I make, from now on. I want you to sit in that office of which you'reso proud, in those precious mills of yours, and play the hero who workseighteen hours a day, the giant of industry who keeps the whole countrygoing, the genius who is above the common herd of whining, lying, chiselinghumanity. Then I want you to come home and face the only person who knows youfor what you really are, who knows the actual value of your word, of yourhonor, of your integrity, of your vaunted self-esteem. I want you to face, inyour own home, the one person who despises you and has the right to do so. Iwant you to look at me whenever you build another furnace, or pour anotherrecord breaking load of steel, or hear applause and admiration, whenever youfeel proud of yourself, whenever you feel clean, whenever you feel drunk onthe sense of your own greatness. I want you to look at me whenever you hearof some act of depravity, or feel anger at human corruption, or feel contemptfor someone's knavery, or are the victim of a new governmental extortion—tolook and to know that you're no better, that you're superior to no one, thatthere's nothing you have the right to condemn. I want you to look at me andto learn the fate of the man who tried to build a tower to the sky, or theman who wanted to reach the sun on wings made of wax—or you, the man whowanted to hold himself as perfect!"

Somewhere outside of him and apart, as if he were reading it in a brainnot his own, he observed the thought that there was some flaw in the schemeof the punishment she wanted him to bear, something wrong by its own terms,aside from its propriety or justice, some practical miscalculation that woulddemolish it all if discovered. He did not attempt to discover it. The thoughtwent by as a moment's notation, made in cold curiosity, to be brought back insome distant future. There was nothing within him now with which to feelinterest or to respond.

His own brain was numb with the effort to hold the last of his sense ofjustice against so overwhelming a tide of revulsion that it swamped Lillianout of human form, past all his pleas to himself that he had no right to feelit. If she was loathsome, he thought, it was he who had brought her to it;this was her way of taking pain—no one could prescribe the form of a humanbeing's attempt to bear suffering—no one could blame—above all, not he, whohad caused it. But he saw no evidence of pain in her manner. Then perhaps theugliness was the only means she could summon to hide it, he thought. Then hethought of nothing except of withstanding the revulsion, for the length ofthe next moment and of the next.

When she stopped speaking, he asked, "Have you finished?"

"Yes, I believe so."

"Then you had better take the train home now."

When he undertook the motions necessary to remove his evening clothes, hediscovered that his muscles felt as if he were at the end of a long day ofphysical labor. His starched shirt was limp with sweat.

There was neither thought nor feeling left in him, nothing but a sensethat merged the remnants of both, the sense of congratulation upon the

greatest victory he had ever demanded of himself: that Lillian had walked outof the hotel suite alive.

Entering Rearden's office, Dr. Floyd Ferris wore the expression of a manso certain of the success of his quest that he could afford a benevolentsmile. He spoke with a smooth, cheerful assurance; Rearden had the impressionthat it was the assurance of a cardsharp who has spent a prodigious effort inmemorizing every possible variation of the pattern, and is now safe in theknowledge that every card in the deck is marked.

"Well, Mr. Rearden," he said, by way of greeting, "I didn't know that evena hardened hound of public functions and shaker of famous hands, like myself,could still get a thrill out of meeting an eminent man, but that's what Ifeel right now, believe it or not."

"How do you do," said Rearden.

Dr. Ferris sat down and made a few remarks about the colors of the leavesin the month of October, as he had observed them by the roadside on his longdrive from Washington, undertaken specifically for the purpose of meeting Mr.Rearden in person. Rearden said nothing. Dr.

Ferris looked out the window and commented on the inspiring sight of theRearden mills which, he said, were one of the most valuable productiveenterprises in the country.

"That is not what you thought of my product a year and a half ago,"

said Rearden.

Dr. Ferris gave a brief frown, as if a dot of the pattern had slipped andalmost cost him the game, then chuckled, as if he had recaptured it. "Thatwas a year and a half ago, Mr. Rearden," he said easily.

"Times change, and people change with the times—the wise ones do.

Wisdom lies in knowing when to remember and when to forget. Consistency isnot a habit of mind which it is wise to practice or to expect of the humanrace."

He then proceeded to discourse upon the foolishness of consistency in aworld where nothing was absolute except the principle of compromise. Hetalked earnestly, but in a casual manner, as if they both understood thatthis was not the main subject of their interview; yet, oddly, he spoke not inthe tone of a foreword, but in the tone of a postscript, as if the mainsubject had been settled long ago.

Rearden waited for the first "Don't you think so?" and answered, "Pleasestate the urgent matter for which you requested this appointment."

Dr. Ferris looked astonished and blank for a moment, then said brightly,as if remembering an unimportant subject which could be disposed of withouteffort, "Oh, that? That was in regard to the dates of delivery of ReardenMetal to the State Science Institute. We should like to have five thousandtons by the first of December, and then we'll be quite agreeable to waitingfor the balance of the order until after the first of the year."

Rearden sat looking at him silently for a long time; each passing momenthad the effect of making the gay intonations of Dr. Ferris' voice, stillhanging in the air of the room, seem more foolish. When Dr. Ferris had begunto dread that he would not answer at all, Rearden answered, "Hasn't thetraffic cop with the leather leggings, whom you sent here, given you a reporton his conversation with me?"

"Why, yes, Mr. Rearden, but—"

"What else do you want to hear?"

"But that was five months ago, Mr. Rearden. A certain event has takenplace since, which makes me quite sure that you have changed your mind andthat you will make no trouble for us at all, just as we will make no troublefor you."

"What event?"

"An event of which you have far greater knowledge than I—but, you see, Ido have knowledge of it, even though you would much prefer me to have none.""What event?"

"Since it is your secret, Mr. Rearden, why not let it remain a secret?

Who doesn't have secrets nowadays? For instance, Project X is a secret.

You realize, of course, that we could obtain your Metal simply by havingit purchased in smaller quantities by various government offices who wouldthen transfer it to us—and you would not be able to prevent it.

But this would necessitate our letting a lot of lousy bureaucrats"—Dr.

Ferris smiled with disarming frankness—"oh yes, we are as unpopular withone another as we are with you private citizens—it would necessitate ourletting a lot of other bureaucrats in on the secret of Project X, which wouldbe highly undesirable at this time. And so would any newspaper publicityabout the Project—if we put you on trial for refusal to comply with agovernment order. But if you had to stand trial on another, much more seriouscharge, where Project X and the State Science Institute were not involved,and where you could not raise any issue of principle or arouse any publicsympathy—why, that would not inconvenience us at all, but it would cost youmore than you would care to contemplate. Therefore, the only practical thingfor you to do is to help us keep our secret and get us to help you keepyours—and, as I'm sure you realize, we are fully able to keep any of thebureaucrats safely off your trail for as long as we wish,"

"What event, what secret and what trail?"

"Oh, come, Mr. Rearden, don't be childish! The four thousand tons ofRearden Metal which you delivered to Ken Danagger, of course, "said Dr. Ferris lightly.Rearden did not answer.

"Issues of. principle are such a nuisance," said Dr. Ferris, smiling, "andsuch a waste of time for all concerned. Now would you care to be a martyr foran issue of principle, only in circumstances where nobody will know thatthat's what you are—nobody but you and me—where you won't get a chance tobreathe a word about the issue or the principle—where you won't be a hero,the creator of a spectacular new metal, making a stand against enemies whoseactions might appear somewhat shabby in the eyes of the public—where youwon't be a hero, but a common criminal, a greedy industrialist who's cheatedthe law for a plain motive of profit, a racketeer of the black market who'sbroken the national regulations designed to protect the public welfare—a herowithout glory and without public, who'll accomplish no more than about half acolumn of newsprint somewhere on page five—now would you still care to bethat kind of martyr? Because that's just what the issue amounts to now:either you let us have the Metal or you go to jail for ten years and takeyour friend Danagger along, too."

As a biologist, Dr. Ferris had always been fascinated by the theory thatanimals had the capacity to smell fear; he had tried to develop a similarcapacity in himself. Watching Rearden, he concluded that the man had longsince decided to give in—because he caught no trace of any fear.

"Who was your informer?" asked Rearden.

"One of your friends, Mr. Rearden. The owner of a copper mine in Arizona,who reported to us that you had purchased an extra amount of copper lastmonth, above the regular tonnage required for the monthly quota of ReardenMetal which the law permits you to produce. Copper is one of the ingredientsof Rearden Metal, isn't it? That was all the information we needed. The restwas easy to trace. You mustn't blame that mine owner too much. The copperproducers, as you know, are being squeezed so badly right now that the manhad to offer something of value in order to obtain a favor, an 'emergencyneed' ruling which suspended a few of the directives in his case and gave hima little breathing spell. The person to whom he traded his information knew

where it would have the highest value, so he traded it to me, in return forcertain favors he needed. So all the necessary evidence, as well as the nextten years of your life, are now in my possession—and I am offering you atrade. I'm sure you won't object, since trade is your specialty. The form maybe a little different from what it was in your youth—but you're a smarttrader, you've always known how to take advantage of changing conditions, andthese are the conditions of our day, so it should not be difficult for you tosee where your interests lie and to act accordingly."

Rearden said calmly, "In my youth, this was called blackmail."

Dr. Ferris grinned. "That's what it is, Mr. Rearden. We've entered a muchmore realistic age."

But there was a peculiar difference, thought Rearden, between the mannerof a plain blackmailer and that of Dr. Ferris. A blackmailer would show signsof gloating over his victim's sin and of acknowledging its evil, he wouldsuggest a threat to the victim and a sense of danger to them both. Dr. Ferrisconveyed none of it. His manner was that of dealing with the normal and thenatural, it suggested a sense of safety, it held no tone of condemnation, buta hint of comradeship, a comradeship based—for both of them—on self-contempt.The sudden feeling that made Rearden lean forward in a posture of eagerattentiveness, was the feeling that he was about to discover another stepalong his half glimpsed trail.

Seeing Rearden's look of interest, Dr. Ferris smiled and congratulatedhimself on having caught the right key. The game was clear to him now, themarkings of the pattern were falling in the right order; some men, thoughtDr. Ferris, would do anything so long as it was left unnamed, but this manwanted frankness, this was the tough realist he had expected to find.

"You're a practical man, Mr. Rearden," said Dr. Ferris amiably. "I can'tunderstand why you should want to stay behind the times. Why don't you adjustyourself and play it right? You're smarter than most of them. You're avaluable person, we've wanted you for a long time, and when I heard that youwere trying to string along with Jim Taggart, I knew you could be had. Don'tbother with Jim Taggart, he's nothing, he's just flea-bait. Get into the biggame. We can use you and you can use us. Want us to step on Orren Boyle foryou? He's given you an awful beating, want us to trim him down a little? Itcan be done. Or want us to keep Ken Danagger in line? Look how impracticalyou've been about that. I know why you sold him the Metal—it's because youneed him to get coal from. So you take a chance on going to jail and payinghuge fines, just to keep on the good side of Ken Danagger. Do you call thatgood business? Now, make a deal with us and just let Mr. Danagger understandthat if he doesn't toe the line, he'll go to jail, but you won't, becauseyou've got friends he hasn't got—and you'll never have to worry about yourcoal supply from then on. Now that's the modern way of doing business. Askyourself which way is more practical. And whatever anyone's said about you,nobody's ever denied that you're a great businessman and a hard-headedrealist."

"That's what I am," said Rearden.

"That's what I thought," said Dr. Ferris. "You rose to riches in an agewhen most men were going bankrupt, you've always managed to blast obstacles,to keep your mills going and to make money—that's your reputation—so youwouldn't want to be impractical now, would you? What for? What do you care,so long as you make money? Leave the theories to people like Bertram Scudderand the ideals to people like Balph Eubank—and be yourself. Come down toearth. You're not the man who'd let sentiment interfere with business."

"No," said Rearden slowly, "I wouldn't. Not any kind of sentiment."

Dr. Ferris smiled. "Don't you suppose we knew it?" he said, his tonesuggesting that he was letting his patent-leather hair down to impress afellow criminal by a display of superior cunning. "We've waited a long time

to get something on you. You honest men are such a problem and such aheadache. But we knew you'd slip sooner or later—and this is just what wewanted."

"You seem to be pleased about it."

"Don't I have good reason to be?"

"But, after all, I did break one of your laws."

"Well, what do you think they're for?"

Dr. Ferris did not notice the sudden look on Rearden's face, the look of aman hit by the first vision of that which he had sought to see.

Dr. Ferris was past the stage of seeing; he was intent upon delivering thelast blows to an animal caught in a trap.

"Did you really think that we want those laws to be observed?" said Dr.Ferris. "We want them broken. You'd better get it straight that it's not abunch of boy scouts you're up against—then you'll know that this is not theage for beautiful gestures. We're after power and we mean it.

You fellows were pikers, but we know the real trick, and you'd better getwise to it. There's no way to rule innocent men. The only power anygovernment has is the power to crack down on criminals. Well, when therearen't enough criminals, one makes them. One declares so many things to be acrime that it becomes impossible for men to live without breaking laws. Whowants a nation of law-abiding citizens? What's there in that for anyone? Butjust pass the kind of laws that can neither be observed nor enforced norobjectively interpreted—and you create a nation of law-breakers—and then youcash in on guilt. Now that's the system, Mr. Rearden, that's the game, andonce you understand it, you'll be much easier to deal with."

Watching Dr. Ferris watch him, Rearden saw the sudden twitch of anxiety,the look that precedes panic, as if a clean card had fallen on the table froma deck Dr. Ferris had never seen before.

What Dr. Ferris was seeing in Rearden's face was the look of luminousserenity that comes from the sudden answer to an old, dark problem, a look ofrelaxation and eagerness together; there was a youthful clarity in Rearden'seyes and the faintest touch of contempt in the line of his mouth. Whateverthis meant—and Dr. Ferris could not decipher it —he was certain of one thing:the face held no sign of guilt.

"There's a flaw in your system, Dr. Ferris," Rearden said quietly, almostlightly, "a practical flaw which you will discover when you put me on trialfor selling four thousand tons of Rearden Metal to Ken Danagger."

It took twenty seconds—Rearden could feel them moving past slowly—at theend of which Dr. Ferris became convinced that he had heard Rearden's finaldecision.

"Do you think we're bluffing?" snapped Dr. Ferris; his voice suddenly hadthe quality of the animals he had spent so much time studying: it sounded asif he were baring his teeth.

"I don't know," said Rearden. "I don't care, one way or the other."

"Are you going to be as impractical as that?"

"The evaluation of an action as 'practical,' Dr. Ferris, depends on whatit is that one wishes to practice."

"Haven't you always placed your self-interest above all else?"

"That is what I am doing right now."

"If you think we'll let you get away with a—"

"You will now please get out of here."

"Whom do you think you're fooling?" Dr. Ferris' voice had risen close tothe edge of a scream. "The day of the barons of industry is done! You've gotthe goods, but we've got the goods on you, and you're going to play it ourway or you'll—"

Rearden had pressed a button; Miss Ives entered the office.

"Dr. Ferris has become confused and has lost his way, Miss Ives,"

said Rearden. "Will you escort him out please?" He turned to Ferris.

"Miss Ives is a woman, she weighs about a hundred pounds, and she has nopractical qualifications at all, only a superlative intellectual efficiency.She would never do for a bouncer in a saloon, only in an impractical place,such as a factory."

Miss Ives looked as if she was performing a duty of no greater emotionalsignificance than taking dictation about a list of shipping invoices.Standing straight in a disciplined manner of icy formality, she held the dooropen, let Dr. Ferris cross the room, then walked out first; Dr. Ferrisfollowed.

She came back a few minutes later, laughing in uncontrollable exultation.

"Mr. Rearden," she asked, laughing at her fear for him, at their danger,at everything but the triumph of the moment, "what is it you're doing?"

He sat in a pose he had never permitted himself before, a pose he hadresented as the most vulgar symbol of the businessman—he sat leaning back inhis chair, with his feet on his desk—and it seemed to her that the posturehad an air of peculiar nobility, that it was not the pose of a stuffyexecutive, but of a young crusader.

"I think I'm discovering a new continent, Owen," he answered cheerfully."A continent that should have been discovered along with America, butwasn't."

"I have to speak of it to you" said Eddie Willers, looking at the workeracross the table. "I don't know why it helps me, but it does-just to know that you're hearing me."

It was late and the lights of the underground cafeteria were low, butEddie Willers could see the worker's eyes looking at him intently.

"I feel as if . . .as if there's no people and no human language left,"said Eddie Willers. "I feel that if I were to scream in the middle of thestreets, there would be no one to hear it. . . . No, that's not quite what Ifeel, it's this: I feel that someone is screaming in the middle of thestreets, but people are passing by and no sound can reach them —and it's notHank Rearden or Ken Danagger or I who's screaming, and yet it seems as ifit's all three of us. . . . Don't you see that somebody should have risen todefend them, but nobody has or will?

Rearden and Danagger were indicted this morning—for an illegal sale ofRearden Metal. They'll go on trial next month. I was there, in the courtroomin Philadelphia, when they read the indictment. Rearden was very calm—I keptfeeling that he was smiling, but he wasn't.

Danagger was worse than calm. He didn't say a word, he just stood there,as if the room were empty. . . . The newspapers are saying that both of themshould be thrown in jail. . . . No . . . no, I'm not shaking, I'm all right,I'll be all right in a moment. . . . That's why I haven't said a word to her,I was afraid I'd explode and I didn't want to make it harder for her, I knowhow she feels. ... Oh yes, she spoke to me about it, and she didn't shake,but it was worse—

you know, the kind of rigidity when a person acts as if she didn't feelanything at all, and . . . Listen, did I ever tell you that I like you?I like you very much—for the way you look right now. You hear us.You understand . . . What did she say? It was strange: it's not HankRearden that she's afraid for, it's Ken Danagger. She said that Rearden willhave the strength to take it, but Danagger won't. Not that he'll lack thestrength, but he'll refuse to take it. She . . . she feels certain that KenDanagger will be the next one to go. To go like Ellis Wyatt and all thoseothers. To give up and vanish . . . Why?

Well, she thinks that there's something like a shift of stress involved-economic and personal stress. As soon as all the weight of the momentshifts to the shoulders of some one man—he's the one who vanishes, like a

pillar slashed off. A year ago, nothing worse could have happened to 'thecountry than to lose Ellis Wyatt. He's the one we lost.

Since then, she says, it's been as if the center of gravity were swingingwildly—like in a sinking cargo ship out of control—shifting from industry toindustry, from man to man. When we lose one, another becomes that much moredesperately needed—and he's the one we lose next. Well, what could be agreater disaster now than to have the country's coal supply left in the handsof men like Boyle or Larkin?

And there's no one left in the coal industry who amounts to much, exceptKen Danagger. So she says that she feels almost as if he's a marked man, asif he's hit by a spotlight right now, waiting to be cut down. . . . What areyou laughing at? It might sound preposterous, but I think it's true. . . .What? . . . Oh yes, you bet she's a smart woman! . . . And then there'sanother thing involved, she says. A man has to come to a certain mentalstage—not anger or despair, but something much, much more than both—before hecan be cut down.

She can't tell what it is, but she knew, long before the fire, that EllisWyatt had reached that stage and something would happen to him.

When she saw Ken Danagger in the courtroom today, she said that he wasready for the destroyer. . . . Yes, that's the words she used: he was readyfor the destroyer. You see, she doesn't think it's happening by chance oraccident. She thinks there's a system behind it, an intention, a man. There'sa destroyer loose in the country, who's cutting down the buttresses one afteranother to let the structure collapse upon our heads. Some ruthless creaturemoved by some inconceivable purpose . . . She says that she won't let him getKen Danagger. She keeps repeating that she must stop Danagger—she wants tospeak to him, to beg, to plead, to revive whatever it is that he's losing, toarm him against the destroyer, before the destroyer comes. She's desperatelyanxious to reach Danagger first. He has refused to see anyone. He's gone backto Pittsburgh, to his mines. But she got him on the phone, late today, andshe's made an appointment to see him tomorrow afternoon. . . . Yes, she'll goto Pittsburgh tomorrow. . . . Yes, she's afraid for Danagger, terriblyafraid. . . . No. She knows nothing about the destroyer. She has no clue tohis identity, no evidence of his existence—except the trail of destruction.But she feels certain that he exists. . . . No, she cannot guess his purpose.She says that nothing on earth could justify him. There are times when shefeels that she'd like to find him more than any other man in the world, morethan the inventor of the motor. She says that if she found the destroyer,she'd shoot him on sight—she'd be willing to give her life if she could takehis first and by her own hand . . . because he's the most evil creaturethat's ever existed, the man who's draining the brains of the world.

. . . I guess it's getting to be too much for her, at times—even for her.I don't think she allows herself to know how tired she is. The other morning,I came to work very early and I found her asleep on the couch in her office,with the light still burning on her desk. She'd been there all night. I juststood and looked at her. I wouldn't have awakened her if the whole goddamnrailroad collapsed. . . . When she was asleep? Why, she looked like a younggirl. She looked as if she felt certain that she would awaken in a worldwhere no one would harm her, as if she had nothing to hide or to fear. That'swhat was terrible—that guiltless purity of her face, with her body twisted byexhaustion, still lying there as she had collapsed. She looked—say, whyshould you ask me what she looks like when she's asleep? . . .

Yes, you're right, why do I talk about it? I shouldn't. I don't know whatmade me think of it. . . . Don't pay any attention to me. I'll be all righttomorrow. I guess it's just that I'm sort of shell-shocked by that courtroom.I keep thinking: if men like Rearden and Danagger are to be sent to jail,then what kind of world are we working in and what for? Isn't there any

justice left on earth? I was foolish enough to say that to a reporter when wewere leaving the courtroom—and he just laughed and said, 'Who is John Gait?'. . . Tell me, what's happening to us? Isn't there a single man of justiceleft? Isn't there anyone to defend them? Oh, do you hear me? Isn't thereanyone to defend them?"

"Mr. Danagger will be free in a moment, Miss Taggart. He has a visitor inhis office. Will you excuse it, please?" said the secretary.

Through the two hours of her flight to Pittsburgh, Dagny had been tenselyunable to justify her anxiety or to dismiss it; there was no reason to countminutes, yet she had felt a blind desire to hurry. The anxiety vanished whenshe entered the anteroom of Ken Danagger's office: she had reached him,nothing had happened to prevent it, she felt safety, confidence and anenormous sense of relief.

The words of the secretary demolished it. You're becoming a coward—thoughtDagny., feeling a causeless jolt of dread at the words, out of all proportionto their meaning.

"I am so sorry, Miss Taggart." She heard the secretary's respectful,solicitous voice and realized that she had stood there without answering."Mr. Danagger will be with you in just a moment. Won't you sit down?" Thevoice conveyed an anxious concern over the impropriety of keeping herwaiting.

Dagny smiled. "Oh, that's quite all right."

She sat down in a wooden armchair, facing the secretary's railing.

She reached for a cigarette and stopped, wondering whether she would havetime to finish it, hoping that she would not, then lighted it brusquely.

It was an old-fashioned frame building, this headquarters of the greatDanagger Coal Company. Somewhere in the hills beyond the window were the pitswhere Ken Danagger had once worked as a miner. He had never moved his officeaway from the coal fields.

She could see the mine entrances cut into the hillsides, small frames ofmetal girders, that led to an immense underground kingdom. They seemedprecariously modest, lost in the violent orange and red of the hills. . . .Under a harsh blue sky, in the sunlight of late October, the sea of leaveslooked like a sea of fire . . . like waves rolling to swallow the fragileposts of the mine doorways. She shuddered and looked away: she thought of theflaming leaves spread over the hills of Wisconsin, on the road toStarnesville.

She noticed that there was only a stub left of the cigarette between herfingers. She lighted another.

When she glanced at the clock on the wall of the anteroom, she caught thesecretary glancing at it at the same time. Her appointment was for threeo'clock; the white dial said: 3:12.

"Please forgive it, Miss Taggart," said the secretary, "Mr. Danagger willbe through, any moment now, Mr. Danagger is extremely punctual about Msappointments. Please believe me that this is unprecedented."

"I know it." She knew that Ken Danagger was as rigidly exact about hisschedule as a railroad timetable and that he had been known to cancel aninterview if a caller permitted himself to arrive five minutes late.

The secretary was an elderly spinster with a forbidding manner: a mannerof even-toned courtesy impervious to any shock, just as her spotless whiteblouse was impervious to an atmosphere filled with coal dust. Dagny thoughtit strange that a hardened, well-trained woman of this type should appear tobe nervous: she volunteered no conversation, she sat still, bent over somepages of paper on her desk. Half of Dagny's cigarette had gone in smoke,while the woman still sat looking at the same page.

When she raised her head to glance at the clock, the 4ial said: 3:30.

"I know that this is inexcusable, Miss Taggart." The note of apprehensionwas obvious in her voice now. "I am unable to understand it.""Would you mind telling Mr. Danagger that I'm here?"

"I can't!" It was almost a cry; she saw Dagny's astonished glance and feltobliged to explain: "Mr. Danagger called me, on the interoffice communicator,and told me that he was not to be interrupted under any circumstances or forany reason whatever."

"When did he do that?"

The moment's pause was like a small air cushion for the answer: "Two hoursago. "

Dagny looked at the closed door of Danagger's office. She could hear thesound of a voice beyond the door, but so faintly that she could not tellwhether it was the voice of one man or the conversation of two; she could notdistinguish the words or the emotional quality of the tone: it was only alow, even progression of sounds that seemed normal and did not convey thepitch of raised voices.

"How long has Mr. Danagger been in conference?" she asked.

"Since one o'clock," said the secretary grimly, then added in apology, "Itwas an unscheduled caller, or Mr. Danagger would never have permitted this tohappen."

The door was not locked, thought Dagny; she felt an unreasoning desire totear it open and walk in—it was only a few wooden boards with a brass knob,it would require only a small muscular contraction of her arm—but she lookedaway, knowing that the power of a civilized order and of Ken Danagger's rightwas more impregnable a barrier than any lock.

She found herself staring at the stubs of her cigarettes in the ashtraystand beside her, and wondered why it gave her a sharper feeling ofapprehension. Then she realized that she was thinking of Hugh Akston: she hadwritten to him, at his diner in Wyoming, asking him to tell her where he hadobtained the cigarette with the dollar sign; her letter had come back, with apostal inscription to inform her that he had moved away, leaving noforwarding address.

She told herself angrily that this had no connection with the presentmoment and that she had to control her nerves. But her hand jerked to pressthe button of the ashtray and make the cigarette stubs vanish inside thestand.

As she looked up, her eyes met the glance of the secretary watching her."I am sorry, Miss Taggart. I don't know what to do about it."

It was an openly desperate plea. "I don't dare interrupt."

Dagny asked slowly, as a demand, in defiance of office etiquette, "Who iswith Mr. Danagger?"

"I don't know, Miss Taggart. I have never seen the gentleman before." Shenoticed the sudden, fixed stillness of Dagny's eyes and added, "I think it'sa childhood friend of Mr. Danagger."

"Oh!" said Dagny, relieved.

"He came in unannounced and asked to see Mr. Danagger and said that thiswas an appointment which Mr. Danagger had made with him forty years ago,""How old is Mr. Danagger?"

"Fifty-two," said the secretary. She added reflectively, in the tone of acasual remark, "Mr. Danagger started working at the age of twelve."

After another silence, she added, "The strange thing is that the visitordoes not look as if he's even forty years old. He seems to be a man in histhirties. "

"Did he give his name?"

"No. "

"What does he look like?"

The secretary smiled with sudden animation, as if she were about to utteran enthusiastic compliment, but the smile vanished abruptly.

"I don't know," she answered uneasily. "He's hard to describe. He has astrange face."

They had been silent for a long time, and the hands of the dial wereapproaching 3:50 when the buzzer rang on the secretary's desk—

the bell from Danagger's office, the signal of permission to enter.

They both leaped to their feet, and the secretary rushed forward, smilingwith relief, hastening to open the door.

As she entered Danagger's office, Dagny saw the private exit door closingafter the caller who had preceded her. She heard the knock of the dooragainst the jamb and the faint tinkle of the glass panel.

She saw the man who had left, by his reflection on Ken Danagger's face. Itwas not the face she had seen in the courtroom, it was not the face she hadknown for years as a countenance of unchanging, unfeeling rigidity—it was aface which a young man of twenty should hope for, but could not achieve, aface from which every sign of strain had been wiped out, so that the linedcheeks, the creased forehead, the graying hair—like elements rearranged by anew theme—were made to form a composition of hope, eagerness and guiltlessserenity: the theme was deliverance.

He did not rise when she entered—he looked as if he had not quite returnedto the reality of the moment and had forgotten the proper routine—but hesmiled at her with such simple benevolence that she found herself smiling inanswer. She caught herself thinking that this was the way every human beingshould greet another—and she lost her anxiety, feeling suddenly certain thatall was well and that nothing to be feared could exist.

"How do you do, Miss Taggart, " he said. "Forgive me, I think that I havekept you waiting. Please sit down." He pointed to the chair in front of hisdesk.

"I didn't mind waiting," she said. "I'm grateful that you gave me thisappointment. I was extremely anxious to speak to you on a matter of urgentimportance."

He leaned forward across the desk, with a look of attentive concentration,as he always did at the mention of an important business matter, but she wasnot speaking to the man she knew, this was a stranger, and she stopped,uncertain about the arguments she had been prepared to use.

He looked at her in silence, and then he said, "Miss Taggart, this is sucha beautiful day—probably the last, this year. There's a thing I've alwayswanted to do, but never had time for it. Let's go back to New York togetherand take one of those excursion boat trips around the island of Manhattan.Let's take a last look at the greatest city in the world."

She sat still, trying to hold her eyes fixed in order to stop the officefrom swaying. This was the Ken Danagger who had never had a personal friend,had never married, had never attended a play or a movie, had never permittedanyone the impertinence of taking his time for any concern but business.

"Mr. Danagger, I came here to speak to you about a matter of crucialimportance to the future of your business and mine. I came to speak to youabout your indictment."

"Oh, that? Don't worry about that. It doesn't matter. I'm going toretire."

She sat still, feeling nothing, wondering numbly whether this was how itfelt to hear a death sentence one had dreaded, but had never quite believedpossible.

Her first movement was a sudden jerk of her head toward the exit door; sheasked, her voice low, her mouth distorted by hatred, "Who was he?"

Danagger laughed. "If you've guessed that much, you should have guessedthat it's a question I won't answer."

"Oh God, Ken Danagger!" she moaned; his words made her realize that thebarrier of hopelessness, of silence, of unanswered questions was alreadyerected between them; the hatred had been only a thin wire that had held herfor a moment and she broke with its breaking.

"Oh God!"

"You're wrong, kid," he said gently. "I know how you feel, but you'rewrong," then added more formally, as if remembering the proper manner, as ifstill trying to balance himself between two kinds of reality, "I'm sorry,Miss Taggart, that you had to come here so soon after."

"I came too late," she said. "That's what I came here to prevent. I knewit would happen."

"Why?"

"I felt certain that he'd get you next, whoever he is.""You did? That's funny. I didn't."

"I wanted to warn you, to ... to arm you against him."

He smiled. "Take my word for it, Miss Taggart, so that you won't tortureyourself with regrets about the timing; that could not have been done."

She felt that with every passing minute he was moving away into some greatdistance where she would not be able to reach him, but there was still somethin bridge left between them and she had to hurry.

She leaned forward, she said very quietly, the intensity of emotion takingform in the exaggerated steadiness of her voice, "Do you remember what youthought and felt, what you were, three hours ago? Do you remember what yourmines meant to you? Do you remember Taggart Transcontinental or ReardenSteel? In the name of that, will you answer me? Will you help me tounderstand?"

"I will answer whatever I may."

"You have decided to retire? To give up your business?""Yes."

"Does it mean nothing to you now?"

"It means more to me now than it ever did before.""But you're going to abandon it?""Yes.""Why?"

"That, I won't answer,"

"You, who loved your work, who respected nothing but work, who despisedevery kind of aimlessness, passivity and renunciation—have you renounced thekind of life you loved?"

"No. I have just discovered how much I do love it."

"But you intend to exist without work or purpose?"

"What makes you think that?"

"Are you going into the coal-mining business somewhere else?"

"No, not into the coal-mining business."

"Then what are you going to do?"

"I haven't decided that yet."

"Where are you going?"

"I won't answer."

She gave herself a moment's pause, to gather her strength, to tellherself; Don't feel, don't show him that you feel anything, don't let itcloud and break the bridge—then she said, in the same quiet, even voice, "Doyou realize what your retirement will do to Hank Rearden, to me, to all therest of us, whoever is left?"

"Yes. I realize it more fully than you do at present."

"And it means nothing to you?"

"It means more than you will care to believe.""Then why are you deserting us?"

"You will not believe it and I will not explain, but I am not desertingyou. "

"We're being left to carry a greater burden, and you're indifferent to theknowledge that you'll see us destroyed by the looters.""Don't be too sure of that."

"Of which? Your indifference or our destruction?""Of either."

"But you know, you knew it this morning, that it's a battle to the death,and it's we—you were one of us—against the looters."

"If I answer that 7 know it, but you don't—you'll think that I attach nomeaning to my words. So take it as you wish, but that is my answer."

"Will you tell me the meaning?"

"No. It's for you to discover."

"You're willing to give up the world to the looters. We aren't.""Don't be too sure of either."

She remained helplessly silent. The strangeness of his manner was itssimplicity; he spoke as if he were being completely natural and—in the midstof unanswered questions and of a tragic mystery—he conveyed the impressionthat there were no secrets any longer, and no mystery need ever have existed.

But as she watched him, she saw the first break in his joyous calm: shesaw him struggling against some thought; he hesitated, then said, witheffort, "About Hank Rearden . . . Will you do me a favor?"

"Of course."

"Will you tell him that I . . . You see, I've never cared for people, yethe was always the man I respected, but I didn't know until today that what Ifelt was,. . . that he was the only man I ever loved. . . .

Just tell him this and that I wish I could—no, I guess that's all I cantell him. . . .He'll probably damn me for leaving . . . still, maybe hewon't."

"I'll tell him."

Hearing the dulled, hidden sound of pain in his voice, she felt so closeto him that it seemed impossible he would deliver the blow he was delivering—and she made one last effort.

"Mr. Danagger, if I were to plead on my knees, if I were to find some sortof words that I haven't found—would there be ... is there a chance to stopyou?"

"There isn't."

After a moment, she asked tonelessly, "When are you quitting?""Tonight."

"What will you do with"—she pointed at the hills beyond the window—"theDanagger Coal Company? To whom are you leaving it?"

"I don't know—or care. To nobody or everybody. To whoever wants to takeit. "

"You're not going to dispose of it or appoint a successor?""No. What for?"

"To leave it in good hands. Couldn't you at least name an heir of your ownchoice? "

"I haven't any choice. It doesn't make any difference to me. Want me toleave it all to you?" He reached for a sheet of paper. "I'll write a letternaming you sole heiress right now, if you want me to."

She shook her head in an involuntary recoil of horror. "I'm not a looter!"

He chuckled, pushing the paper aside. "You see? You gave the right answer,whether you knew it or not. Don't worry about Danagger Coal. It won't makeany difference, whether I appoint the best successor in the world, or theworst, or none. No matter who takes it over now, whether men or weeds, itwon't make any difference."

"But to walk off and abandon . . . just abandon ... an industrialenterprise, as if we were in the age of landless nomads or of savageswandering in the jungle!"

"Aren't we?" He was smiling at her, half in mockery, half in compassion."Why should I leave a deed or a will? I don't want to help the looters topretend that private property still exists. I am complying with the systemwhich they have established. They do not need me, they say, they only need mycoal. Let them take it."

"Then you're accepting their system?"

"Am I?"

She moaned, looking at the exit door, "What has he done to you?""He told me that I had the right to exist."

"I didn't believe it possible that in three hours one could make a manturn against fifty-two years of his life!"

"If that's what you trunk he's done, or if you think that he's told mesome inconceivable revelation, then I can see how bewildering it would appearto you. But that's not what he's done. He merely named what I had lived by,what every man lives by—at and to the extent of such time as he doesn't spenddestroying himself."

She knew that questions were futile and that there was nothing she couldsay to him.

He looked at her bowed head and said gently, "You're a brave person, MissTaggart. I know what you're doing right now and what it's costing you. Don'ttorture yourself. Let me go."

She rose to her feet. She was about to speak—but suddenly he saw her staredown, leap forward and seize the ashtray that stood on the edge of the desk.

The ashtray contained a cigarette butt stamped with the sign of thedollar.

"What's the matter, Miss Taggart?""Did he . . . did he smoke this?""Who?"

"Your caller—did he smoke this cigarette?"

"Why, I don't know ... I guess so . . . yes, I think I did see himsmoking a cigarette once . . . let me see . . . no, that's not my brand, soit must be his."

"Were there any other visitors in this office today?"

"No. But why, Miss Taggart? What's the matter?"

"May I take this?"

"What? The cigarette butt?" He stared at her in bewilderment."Yes."

"Why, sure—but what for?"

She was looking down at the butt in the palm of her hand as if it were ajewel. "I don't know ... I don't know what good it will do me, except thatit's a clue to"—she smiled bitterly—"to a secret of my own."

She stood, reluctant to leave, looking at Ken Danagger in the manner of alast look at one departing for the realm of no return.

He guessed it, smiled and extended his hand. "I won't say goodbye," hesaid, "because I'll see you again in the not too distant future."

"Oh," she said eagerly, holding his hand clasped across the desk, "are yougoing to return?"

"No. You're going to join me."

There was only a faint red breath above the structures in the darkness, asif the mills were asleep but alive, with the even breathing of the furnacesand the distant heartbeats of the conveyor belts to show it.

Rearden stood at the window of his office, his hand pressed to the pane;in the perspective of distance, his hand covered half a mile of structures,as if he were trying to hold them.

He was looking at a long wall of vertical strips, which was the battery ofcoke ovens. A narrow door slid open with a brief gasp of flame, and a sheetof red-glowing coke came sliding out smoothly, like a slice of bread from theside of a giant toaster. It held still for an instant, then an angular crackshot through the slice and it crumbled into a gondola waiting on the railsbelow.

Danagger coal, he thought. These were the only words in his mind.

The rest was a feeling of loneliness, so vast that even its own painseemed swallowed in an enormous void.

Yesterday, Dagny had told him the story of her futile attempt and givenhim Danagger's message. This morning, he had heard the news that Danagger haddisappeared. Through his sleepless night, then through the taut concentrationon the duties of the day, his answer to the message had kept beating in hismind, the answer he would never have a chance to utter.

"The only man I ever loved." It came from Ken Danagger, who had neverexpressed anything more personal than "Look here, Rearden."

He thought: Why had we let it go? Why had we both been condemned —in thehours away from our desks—to an exile among dreary strangers who had made usgive up all desire for rest, for friendship, for the sound of human voices?Could I now reclaim a single hour spent listening to my brother Philip andgive it to Ken Danagger? Who made it our duty to accept, as the only rewardfor our work, the gray torture of pretending love for those who roused us tonothing but contempt?

We who were able to melt rock and metal for our purpose, why had we neversought that which we wanted from men?

He tried to choke the words in his mind, knowing that it was useless tothink of them now. But the words were there and they were like wordsaddressed to the dead: No, I don't damn you for leaving—if that is thequestion and the pain which you took away with you. Why didn't you give me achance to tell you . . . what? that I approve?

. . . no, but that I can neither blame you nor follow you.

Closing his eyes, he permitted himself to experience for a moment theimmense relief he would feel if he, too, were to walk off, abandoningeverything. Under the shock of his loss, he felt a thin thread of envy. Whydidn't they come for me, too, whoever they are, and give me that irresistiblereason which would make me go? But in the next moment, his shudder of angertold him that he would murder the man who'd attempt to approach him, he wouldmurder before he could hear the words of the secret that would take him awayfrom his mills.

It was late, his staff had gone, but he dreaded the road to his house andthe emptiness of the evening ahead. He felt as if the enemy who had wiped outKen Danagger, were waiting for him in the darkness beyond the glow of themills. He was not invulnerable any longer, but whatever it was, he thought,wherever it came from, he was safe from it here, as in a circle of firesdrawn about him to ward off evil.

He looked at the glittering white splashes on the dark windows of astructure in the distance; they were like motionless ripples of sunlight onwater. It was the reflection of the neon sign that burned on the roof of thebuilding above his head, saying: Rearden Steel. He thought of the night whenhe had wished to light a sign above his past, saying: Rearden Life. Why hadhe wished it? For whose eyes to see?

He thought—in bitter astonishment and for the first time—that the joyouspride he had once felt, had come from his respect for men, for the value oftheir admiration and their judgment. He did not feel it any longer. Therewere no men, he thought, to whose sight he could wish to offer that sign.

He turned brusquely away from the window. He seized his overcoat with theharsh sweep of a gesture intended to jolt him back into the discipline of

action. He slammed the two folds of the overcoat about his body, he jerkedthe belt tight, then hastened to turn off the lights with rapid snaps of hishand on his way out of the office.

He threw the door open—and stopped. A single lamp was burning in a cornerof the dimmed anteroom. The man who sat on the edge of a desk, in a pose ofcasual, patient waiting, was Francisco d'Anconia.

Rearden stood still and caught a brief instant when Francisco, not moving,looked at him with the hint of an amused smile that was like a wink betweenconspirators at a secret they both understood, but would not acknowledge. Itwas only an instant, almost too brief to grasp, because it seemed to him thatFrancisco rose at once at his entrance, with a movement of courteousdeference. The movement suggested a strict formality, the denial of anyattempt at presumption—but it stressed the intimacy of the fact that heuttered no word of greeting or explanation.

Rearden asked, his voice hard, "What are you doing here?"

"I thought that you would want to see me tonight, Mr. Rearden."

"Why?"

"For the same reason that has kept you so late in your office. You werenot working."

"How long have you been sitting here?""An hour or two."

"Why didn't you knock at my door?""Would you have allowed me to come in?""You're late in asking that question,""Shall I leave, Mr. Rearden?"

Rearden pointed to the door of his office. "Come in."

Turning the lights on in the office, moving with unhurried control,Rearden thought that he must not allow himself to feel anything, but felt thecolor of life returning to him in the tensely quiet eagerness of an emotionwhich he would not identify. What he told himself consciously was: Becareful.

He sat down on the edge of his desk, crossed his arms, looked atFrancisco, who remained standing respectfully before him, and asked with thecold hint of a smile, "Why did you come here?"

"You don't want me to answer, Mr. Rearden. You wouldn't admit to me or toyourself how desperately lonely you are tonight. If you don't question me,you won't feel obliged to deny it. Just accept what you do know, anyway: thatI know it."

Taut like a string pulled by anger against the impertinence at one end andby admiration for the frankness at the other, Rearden answered, "I'll admitit, if you wish. What should it matter to me, that you know it?"

"That I know and care, Mr. Rearden. I'm the only man around you who does."

"Why should you care? And why should I need your help tonight?"

"Because it's not easy to have to damn the man who meant most to you."

"I wouldn't damn you if you'd only stay away from me."

Francisco's eyes widened a little, then he grinned and said, "I wasspeaking of Mr. Danagger."

For an instant, Rearden looked as if he wanted to slap his own face, thenhe laughed softly and said, "All right. Sit down."

He waited to see what advantage Francisco would take of it now, butFrancisco obeyed him in silence, with a smile that had an oddly boyishquality: a look of triumph and gratitude, together.

"I don't damn Ken Danagger," said Rearden.

"You don't?" The two words seemed to fall with a singular emphasis; theywere pronounced very quietly, almost cautiously, with no remnant of a smileon Francisco's face.

"No. I don't try to prescribe how much a man should have to bear.

If he broke, it's not for me to judge him.""If he broke . . . ?""Well, didn't he?"

Francisco leaned back; his smile returned, but it was not a happy smile."What will his disappearance do to you?"

"I will just have to work a little harder."

Francisco looked at a steel bridge traced in black strokes against redsteam beyond the window, and said, pointing, "Every one of those girders hasa limit to the load it can carry. What's yours?"

Rearden laughed. "Is that what you're afraid of? Is that why you camehere? Were you afraid I'd break? Did you want to save me, as Dagny Taggartwanted to save Ken Danagger? She tried to reach him in time, but couldn't."

"She did? I didn't know it. Miss Taggart and I disagree about manythings."

"Don't worry. I'm not going to vanish. Let them all give up and stopworking. I won't. I don't know my limit and don't care. All I have to know isthat I can't be stopped."

"Any man can be stopped, Mr. Rearden."

"How?"

"It's only a matter of knowing man's motive power.""What is it?"

"You ought to know, Mr. Rearden. You're one of the last moral men left tothe world."

Rearden chuckled in bitter amusement. "I've been called just abouteverything but that. And you're wrong. You have no idea how wrong.""Are you sure?"

"I ought to know. Moral? What on earth made you say it?"Francisco pointed to the mills beyond the window. "This."

For a long moment, Rearden looked at him without moving, then asked only,"What do you mean?"

"If you want to see an abstract principle, such as moral action, inmaterial form—there it is. Look at it, Mr. Rearden. Every girder of it, everypipe, wire and valve was put there by a choice in answer to the question:right or wrong? You had to choose right and you had to choose the best withinyour knowledge—the best for your purpose, which was to make steel—and thenmove on and extend the knowledge, and do better, and still better, with yourpurpose as your standard of value. You had to act on your own judgment, youhad to have the capacity to judge, the courage to stand on the verdict ofyour mind, and the purest, the most ruthless consecration to the rule ofdoing right, of doing the best, the utmost best possible to you. Nothingcould have made you act against your judgment, and you would have rejected aswrong—as evil—any man who attempted to tell you that the best way to heat afurnace was to fill it with ice. Millions of men, an entire nation, were notable to deter you from producing Rearden Metal—because you had the knowledgeof its superlative value and the power which such knowledge gives. But what Iwonder about, Mr. Rearden, is why you live by one code of principles when youdeal with nature and by another when you deal with men?"

Rearden's eyes were fixed on him so intently that the question cameslowly, as if the effort to pronounce it were a distraction: "What do youmean?"

"Why don't you hold to the purpose of your life as clearly and rigidly asyou hold to the purpose of your mills?""What do you mean?"

"You have judged every brick within this place by its value to the goal ofmaking steel. Have you been as strict about the goal which your work and yoursteel are serving? What do you wish to achieve by giving your life to themaking of steel? By what standard of value do you judge your days? For

instance, why did you spend ten years of exacting effort to produce ReardenMetal?"

Rearden looked away, the slight, slumping movement of his shoulders like asigh of release and disappointment. "If you have to ask that, then youwouldn't understand."

"If I told you that I understand it, but you don't—would you throw me outof here?"

"T should have thrown you out of here anyway—so go ahead, tell me what youmean."

"Are you proud of the rail of the John Gait Line?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Because it's the best rail ever made.""Why did you make it?""In order to make money."

"There were many easier ways to make money. Why did you choose thehardest?"

"You said it in your speech at Taggart's wedding: in order to exchange mybest effort for the best effort of others."

"If that was your purpose, have you achieved it?"

A beat of time vanished in a heavy drop of silence. "No," said Rearden."Have you made any money?""No. "

"When you strain your energy to its utmost in order to produce the best,do you expect to be rewarded for it or punished?" Rearden did not answer. "Byevery standard of decency, of honor, of justice known to you—are youconvinced that you should have been rewarded for it?"

"Yes," said Rearden, his voice low.

"Then if you were punished, instead—what sort of code have you accepted?"Rearden did not answer.

"It is generally assumed," said Francisco, "that living in a human societymakes one's life much easier and safer than if one were left alone tostruggle against nature on a desert island. Now wherever there is a man whoneeds or uses metal in any way—Rearden Metal has made his life easier forhim. Has it made yours easier for you?"

"No," said Rearden, his voice low.

"Has it left your life as it was before you produced the Metal?""No—" said Rearden, the word breaking off as if he had cut short thethought that followed.

Francisco's voice lashed at him suddenly, as a command: "Say it!""It has made it harder," said Rearden tonelessly.

"When you felt proud of the rail of the John Gait Line," said Francisco,the measured rhythm of his voice giving a ruthless clarity to his words,"what sort of men did you think of? Did you want to see that Line used byyour equals—by giants of productive energy, such as Ellis Wyatt, whom itwould help to reach higher and still higher achievements of their own?"

"Yes," said Rearden eagerly.

"Did you want to see it used by men who could not equal the power of yourmind, but who would equal your moral integrity—men such as Eddie Willers—whocould never invent your Metal, but who would do their best, work as hard asyou did, live by their own effort, and—riding on your rail—give a moment'ssilent thanks to the man who gave them more than they could give him?"

"Yes," said Rearden gently.

"Did you want to see it used by whining rotters who never rouse themselvesto any effort, who do not possess the ability of a filing clerk, but demandthe income of a company president, who drift from failure to failure andexpect you to pay their bills, who hold their wishing as an equivalent of

your work and their need as a higher claim to reward than your effort, whodemand that you serve them, who demand that it be the aim of your life toserve them, who demand that your strength be the voiceless, rightless,unpaid, unrewarded slave of their impotence, who proclaim that you are bornto serfdom by reason of your genius, while they are born to rule by the graceof incompetence, that yours is only to give, but theirs only to take, thatyours is to produce, but theirs to consume, that you are not to be paid,neither in matter nor in spirit, neither by wealth nor by recognition nor byrespect nor by gratitude—so that they would ride on your rail and sneer atyou and curse you, since they owe you nothing, not even the effort of takingoff their hats which you paid for? Would this be what you wanted? Would youfeel proud of it?"

'I'd blast that rail first," said Rearden, his lips white.

'Then why don't you do it, Mr. Rearden? Of the three kinds of men Idescribed—which men are being destroyed and which are using your Line today?"

They heard the distant metal heartbeats of the mills through the longthread of silence.

"What I described last," said Francisco, "is any man who proclaims hisright to a single penny of another man's effort."

Rearden did not answer; he was looking at the reflection of a neon sign ondark windows in the distance.

"You take pride in setting no limit to your endurance, Mr. Rearden,because you think that you are doing right. What if you aren't? What ifyou're placing your virtue in the service of evil and letting it become atool for the destruction of everything you love, respect and admire?

Why don't you uphold your own code of values among men as you do amongiron smelters? You who won't allow one per cent of impurity into an alloy ofmetal—what have you allowed into your moral code?"

Rearden sat very still; the words in his mind were like the beat of stepsdown the trail he had been seeking; the words were: the sanction of thevictim.

"You, who would not submit to the hardships of nature, but set out toconquer it and placed it in the service of your joy and your comfort—to whathave you submitted at the hands of men? You, who know from your work that onebears punishment only for being wrong —what have you been willing to bear andfor what reason? All your life, you have heard yourself denounced, not foryour faults, but for your greatest virtues. You have been hated, not for yourmistakes, but for your achievements. You have been scorned for all thosequalities of character which are your highest pride. You have been calledselfish for the courage of acting on your own judgment and bearing soleresponsibility for your own life. You have been called arrogant for yourindependent mind. You have been called cruel for your unyielding integrity.You have been called anti-social for the vision that made you venture uponundiscovered roads. You have been called ruthless for the strength and self-discipline of your drive to your purpose. You have been called greedy for themagnificence of your power to create wealth. You, who've expended aninconceivable flow of energy, have been called a parasite. You, who'vecreated abundance where there had been nothing but wastelands and helpless,starving men before you, have been called a robber. You, who've kept them allalive, have been called an exploiter. You, the purest and most moral manamong them, have been sneered at as a 'vulgar materialist.' Have you stoppedto ask them: by what right?—by what code?—by what standard? No, you haveborne it all and kept silent. You bowed to their code and you never upheldyour own. You knew what exacting morality was needed to produce a singlemetal nail, but you let them brand you as immoral.

You knew that man needs the strictest code of values to deal with nature,but you thought that you needed no such code to deal with men. You left the

deadliest weapon in the hands of your enemies, a weapon you never suspectedor understood. Their moral code is their weapon. Ask yourself how deeply andin how many terrible ways you have accepted it. Ask yourself what it is thata code of moral values does to a man's life, and why he can't exist withoutit, and what happens to him if he accepts the wrong standard, by which theevil is the good. Shall I tell you why you're drawn to me, even though youthink you ought to damn me? It's because I'm the first man who has given youwhat the whole world owes you and what you should have demanded of all menbefore you dealt with them: a moral sanction."

Rearden whirled to him, then remained still, with a stillness like a gasp.Francisco leaned forward, as if he were reaching the landing of a dangerousflight, and his eyes were steady, but their glance seemed to tremble withintensity.

"You're guilty of a great sin, Mr. Rearden, much guiltier than they tellyou, but not in the way they preach. The worst guilt is to accept anundeserved guilt—and that is what you have been doing all your life.

You have been paying blackmail, not for your vices, but for your virtues.You have been willing to carry the load of an unearned punishment—and toiletit grow the heavier the greater the virtues you practiced. But your virtueswere those which keep men alive. Your own moral code—the one you lived by,but never stated, acknowledged or defended—was the code that preserves man'sexistence. If you were punished for it, what was the nature of those whopunished you?

Yours was the code of life. What, then, is theirs? What standard of valuelies at its root? What is its ultimate purpose? Do you think that what you'refacing is merely a conspiracy to seize your wealth? You, who know the sourceof wealth, should know it's much more and much worse than that. Did you askme to name man's motive power?

Man's motive power is his moral code. Ask yourself where their code isleading you and what it offers you as your final goal. A viler evil than tomurder a man, is to sell him suicide as an act of virtue. A viler evil thanto throw a man into a sacrificial furnace, is to demand that he leap in, ofhis own will, and that he build the furnace, besides. By their own statement,it is they who need you and have nothing to offer you in return. By their ownstatement, you must support them because they cannot survive without you.Consider the obscenity of offering their impotence and their need—their needof you—as a justification for your torture. Are you willing to accept it? Doyou care to purchase—at the price of your great endurance, at the price ofyour agony—the satisfaction of the needs of your own destroyers?"

"No! "

"Mr. Rearden," said Francisco, his voice solemnly calm, "if you saw Atlas,the giant who holds the world on his shoulders, if you saw that he stood,blood running down his chest, his knees buckling, his arms trembling butstill trying to hold the world aloft with the last of his strength, and thegreater his effort the heavier the world bore down upon his shoulders—whatwould you tell him to do?"

"I . . . don't know. What . . . could he do? What would you tell him?"

"To shrug."

The clatter of the metal came in a flow of irregular sounds withoutdiscernible rhythm, not like the action of a mechanism, but as if someconscious impulse were behind every sudden, tearing rise that went up andcrashed, scattering into the faint moan of gears. The glass of the windowstinkled once in a while.

Francisco's eyes were watching Rearden as if he were examining the courseof bullets on a battered target. The course was hard to trace: the gauntfigure on the edge of the desk was erect, the cold blue eyes showed nothing

but the intensity of a glance fixed upon a great distance, only theinflexible mouth betrayed a line drawn by pain.

"Go on," said Rearden with effort, "continue. You haven't finished, haveyou?"

"I have barely begun." Francisco's voice was hard."What . . . are you driving at?"

"You'll know it before I'm through. But first, I want you to answer aquestion: if you understand the nature of your burden, how can you . . ."

The scream of an alarm siren shattered the space beyond the window andshot like a rocket in a long, thin line to the sky. It held for an instant,then fell, then went on in rising, falling spirals of sound, as if fightingfor breath against terror to scream louder. It was the shriek of agony, thecall for help, the voice of the mills as of a wounded body crying to hold itssoul.

Rearden thought that he leaped for the door the instant the scream hit hisconsciousness, but he saw that he was an instant late, because Francisco hadpreceded him. Flung by the blast of the same response as his own, Franciscowas flying down the hall, pressing the button of the elevator and, notwaiting, racing on down the stairs. Rearden followed him and, watching thedial of the elevator on the stair landings, they met it halfway down theheight of the building. Before the steel cage had ceased trembling at thesill of the ground floor, Francisco was out, racing to meet the sound of thecall for help. Rearden had thought himself a good runner, but he could notkeep up with the swift figure streaking off through stretches of red glareand darkness, the figure of a useless playboy he had hated himself foradmiring.

The stream, gushing from a hole low on the side of a blast furnace, didnot have the red glow of fire, but the white radiance of sunlight.

It poured along the ground, branching off at random in sudden streaks; itcut through a dank fog of steam with a bright suggestion of morning.

It was liquid iron, and what the scream of the alarm proclaimed was abreak-out.

The charge of the furnace had been hung up and, breaking, had blown thetap-hole open. The furnace foreman lay knocked unconscious, the white flowspurted, slowly tearing the hole wider, and men were struggling with sand,hose and fire clay to stop the glowing streaks that spread in a heavy,gliding motion, eating everything on their way into jets of acrid smoke.

In the few moments which Rearden needed to grasp the sight and nature ofthe disaster, he saw a man's figure rising suddenly at the foot of thefurnace, a figure outlined by the red glare almost as if it stood in the pathof the torrent, he saw the swing of a white shirt sleeved arm that rose andflung a black object into the source of the spurting metal. It was Franciscod'Anconia, and his action belonged to an art which Rearden had not believedany man to be trained to perform any longer.

Years before, Rearden had worked in an obscure steel plant in Minnesota,where it had been his job, after a blast furnace was tapped, to close thehole by hand—by throwing bullets of fire clay to dam the flow of the metal.It was a dangerous job that had taken many lives; it had been abolished yearsearlier by the invention of the hydraulic gun; but there had been struggling,failing mills which, on their way down, had attempted to use the outwornequipment and methods of a distant past. Rearden had done the job; but in theyears since, he had met no other man able to do it. In the midst of shootingjets of live steam, in the face of a crumbling blast furnace, he was nowseeing the tall, slim figure of the playboy performing the task with theskill of an expert.

It took an instant for Rearden to tear off his coat, seize a pair ofgoggles from the first man in sight and join Francisco at the mouth of the

furnace. There was no time to speak, to feel or to wonder. Francisco glancedat him once—and what Rearden saw was a smudged face, black goggles and a widegrin.

They stood on a slippery bank of baked mud, at the edge of the whitestream, with the raging hole under their feet, flinging clay into the glarewhere the twisting tongues that looked like gas were boiling metal. Rearden'sconsciousness became a progression of bending, raising the weight, aiming andsending it down and, before it had reached its unseen destination, bendingfor the next one again, a consciousness drawn tight upon watching the aim ofhis arm, to save the furnace, and the precarious posture of his feet, to savehimself. He was aware of nothing else—except that the sum of it was theexultant feeling of action, of his own capacity, of his body's precision, ofits response to his will. And with no time to know it, but knowing it,seizing it with his senses past the censorship of his mind, he was seeing ablack silhouette with red rays shooting from behind its shoulders, itselbows, its angular curves, the red rays circling through steam like the longneedles of spotlights, following the movements of a swift, expert, confidentbeing whom he had never seen before except in evening clothes under thelights of ballrooms.

There was no time to form words, to think, to explain, but he knew thatthis was the real Francisco d'Anconia, this was what he had seen from thefirst and loved—the word did not shock him, because there was no word in hismind, there was only a joyous feeling that seemed like a flow of energy addedto his own.

To the rhythm of his body, with the scorching heat on his face and thewinter night on his shoulder blades, he was seeing suddenly that this was thesimple essence of his universe: the instantaneous refusal to submit todisaster, the irresistible drive to fight it, the triumphant feeling of hisown ability to win. He was certain that Francisco felt it, too, that he hadbeen moved by the same impulse, that it was right to feel it, right for bothof them to be what they were—he caught glimpses of a sweat-streaked faceintent upon action, and it was the most joyous face he had ever seen.

The furnace stood above them, a black bulk wrapped in coils of tubes andsteam; she seemed to pant, shooting red gasps that hung on the air above themills—and they fought not to let her bleed to death.

Sparks hung about their feet and burst in sudden sheafs out of the metal,dying unnoticed against their clothes, against the skin of their hands. Thestream was coming slower, in broken spurts through the dam rising beyondtheir sight.

It happened so fast that Rearden knew it fully only after it was over.

He knew that there were two moments: the first was when he saw the violentswing of Francisco's body in a forward thrust that sent the bullet tocontinue the line in space, then he saw the sudden, unrhythmic jerk backwardthat did not succeed, the convulsive beating against a forward pull, theextended arms of the silhouette losing its balance, he thought that a leapacross the distance between them on the slippery, crumbling ridge would meanthe death of both of them—and the second moment was when he landed atFrancisco's side, held him in his arms, hung swaying together between spaceand ridge, over the white pit, then gained his footing and pulled him back,and, for an instant, still held the length of Francisco's body against thelength of his own, as he would have held the body of an only son. His love,his terror, his relief were in a single sentence: "Be careful, you goddamnfool! "

Francisco reached for a chunk of clay and went on.

When the job was done and the gap was closed, Rearden noticed that therewas a twisting pain in the muscles of his arms and legs, that his body had no

strength left to move—yet that he felt as if he were entering his office inthe morning, eager for ten new problems to solve.

He looked at Francisco and noticed for the first time that their clotheshad blade-ringed holes, that their hands were bleeding, that there was apatch of skin torn on Francisco's temple and a red thread winding down hischeekbone. Francisco pushed the goggles back off his eyes and grinned at him:it was a smile of morning.

A young man with a look of chronic hurt and impertinence together, rushedup to him, crying, "I couldn't help it, Mr. Rearden!"

and launched into a speech of explanation. Rearden turned his back on himwithout a word. It was the assistant in charge of the pressure gauge of thefurnace, a young man out of college.

Somewhere on the outer edge of Rearden's consciousness, there was thethought that accidents of this nature were happening more frequently now,caused by the kind of ore he was using, but he had to use whatever ore hecould find. There was the thought that his old workers had always been ableto avert disaster; any of them would have seen e indications of a hang-up andknown how to prevent it; but there were not many of them left, and he had toemploy whatever men he could find. Through the swirling coils of steam aroundhim, he observed that it was the older men who had rushed from all over themills to fight the break-out and now stood in line, being given first aid bythe medical staff. He wondered what was happening to the young men of thecountry. But the wonder was swallowed by the sight of the college boy's face,which he could not bear to see, by a wave of contempt, by the wordlessthought that if this was the enemy, there was nothing to fear. All thesethings came to him and vanished in the outer darkness; the sight blottingthem out was Francisco d'Anconia, He saw Francisco giving orders to the menaround him. They did not know who he was or where he came from, but theylistened: they knew he was a man who knew his job. Francisco broke off in themiddle of a sentence, seeing Rearden approach and listen, and said, laughing,"Oh, I beg your pardon!" Rearden said, "Go right ahead. It's all correct, sofar. "

They said nothing to each other when they walked together through thedarkness, on their way back to the office. Rearden felt an exultant laughterswelling within him, he felt that he wanted, in his turn, to wink atFrancisco like a fellow conspirator who had learned a secret Francisco wouldnot acknowledge. He glanced at his face once in a while, but Francisco wouldnot look at him.

After a while, Francisco said, "You saved my Me." The "thank you"

was in the way he said it.

Rearden chuckled. "You saved my furnace."

They went on in silence. Rearden felt himself growing lighter with everystep. Raising his face to the cold air, he saw the peaceful darkness bf thesky and a single star above a smokestack with the vertical lettering: ReardenSteel. He felt how glad he was to be alive.

He did not expect the change he saw in Francisco's face when he looked atit in the light of his office. The things he had seen by the glare of thefurnace were gone. He had expected a look of triumph, of mockery at all theinsults Francisco had heard from him, a look demanding the apology he wasjoyously eager to offer. Instead, he saw a face made lifeless by an odddejection.

"Are you hurt?"

"No . . . no, not at all."

"Come here," ordered Rearden, opening the door of his bathroom.. "Look at yourself.""Never mind. You come here."

For the first time, Rearden felt that he was the older man; he felt thepleasure of taking Francisco in charge; he felt a confident, amused, paternalprotectiveness. He washed the grime off Francisco's face, he putdisinfectants and adhesive bandages on his temple, his hands, his scorchedelbows. Francisco obeyed him in silence.

Rearden asked, in the tone of the most eloquent salute he could offer,"Where did you learn to work like that?"

Francisco shrugged. "I was brought up around smelters of every kind," heanswered indifferently.

Rearden could not decipher the expression of his face: it was only a lookof peculiar stillness, as if his eyes were fixed on some secret vision of hisown that drew his mouth into a line of desolate, bitter, hurting self-mockery .

They did not speak until they were back in the office.

"You know," said Rearden, "everything you said here was true. But that wasonly part of the story. The other part is what we've done tonight. Don't yousee? We're able to act. They're not. So it's we who'll win in the long run,no matter what they do to us."

Francisco did not answer, "Listen," said Rearden, "I know what's been thetrouble with you.

You've never cared to do a real day's work in your life. I thought youwere conceited enough, but I see that you have no idea of what you've got inyou. Forget that fortune of yours for a while and come to work for me. I'llstart you as furnace foreman any time. You don't know what it will do foryou. In a few years, you'll be ready to appreciate and to run d'AnconiaCopper."

He expected a burst of laughter and he was prepared to argue; instead, hesaw Francisco shaking his head slowly, as if he could not trust his voice, asif he feared that were he to speak, he would accept.

In a moment, he said, "Mr. Rearden ... I think I would give the rest ofmy life for one year as your furnace foreman. But I can't."

"Why not?"

"Don't ask me. It's ... a personal matter."

The vision of Francisco in Rearden's mind, which he had resented and foundirresistibly attractive, had been the figure of a man radiantly incapable ofsuffering. What he saw now in Francisco's eyes was the look of a quiet,tightly controlled, patiently borne torture.

Francisco reached silently for his overcoat.

"You're not leaving, are you?" asked Rearden, "Yes."

"Aren't you going to finish what you had to tell me?"

"Not tonight."

"You wanted me to answer a question. What was it?"Francisco shook his head.

"You started asking me how can I . . . How can I—what?"

Francisco's smile was like a moan of pain, the only moan he would permithimself. "I won't ask it, Mr. Rearden. I know it."

CHAPTER IVTHE SANCTION OF THE VICTIM

The roast turkey had cost $30. The champagne had cost $25. The lacetablecloth, a cobweb of grapes and vine leaves iridescent in the candlelight,had cost $2,000. The dinner service, with an artist's design burned in blueand gold into a translucent white china, had cost $2,500.

The silverware, which bore the initials LR in Empire wreaths of laurels,had cost $3,000. But it was held to be unspiritual to think of money and ofwhat that money represented.

A peasant's wooden shoe, gilded, stood in the center of the table, filledwith marigolds, grapes and carrots. The candles were stuck into pumpkins thatwere cut as open-mouthed faces drooling raisins, nuts and candy upon thetablecloth.

It was Thanksgiving dinner, and the three who faced Rearden about thetable were his wife, his mother and his brother.

"This is the night to thank the Lord for our blessings," said Rearden'smother. "God has been kind to us. There are people all over the country whohaven't got any food in the house tonight, and some that haven't even got ahouse, and more of them going jobless every day.

Gives me the creeps to look around in the city. Why, only last week, whodo you suppose I ran into but Lucie Judson—Henry, do you remember LucieJudson? Used to live next door to us. up in Minnesota, when you were ten-twelve years old. Had a boy about your age. I lost track of Lucie when theymoved to New York, must have been all of twenty years ago. Well, it gave methe creeps to see what she's come to—just a toothless old hag, wrapped in aman's overcoat, panhandling on a street corner. And I thought: That could'vebeen me, but for the grace of God."

"Well, if thanks are in order," said Lillian gaily, "I think that weshouldn't forget Gertrude, the new cook. She's an artist."

"Me, I'm just going to be old-fashioned," said Philip. "I'm just going tothank the sweetest mother in the world."

"Well, for the matter of that," said Rearden's mother, "we ought to .thank Lillian for this dinner and for all the trouble she took to make it sopretty. She spent hours fixing the table. It's real quaint and different."

"It's the wooden shoe that does it," said Philip, bending his headsidewise to study it in a manner of critical appreciation. "That's the realtouch. Anybody can have candles, silverware and junk, that doesn't takeanything but money—but this shoe, that took thought."

Rearden said nothing. The candlelight moved over his motionless face asover a portrait; the portrait bore an expression of impersonal courtesy.

"You haven't touched your wine," said his mother, looking at him.

"What I think is you ought to drink a toast in gratitude to the people ofthis country who have given you so much."

"Henry is not in the mood for it, Mother," said Lillian. "I'm afraidThanksgiving is a holiday only for those who have a clear conscience."

She raised her wine glass, but stopped it halfway to her lips and asked,"You're not going to make some sort of stand at your trial tomorrow, are you,Henry?"

"I am."

She put the glass down. "What are you going to do?""You'll see it tomorrow."

"You don't really imagine that you can get away with it!"

"I don't know what you have in mind as the object I'm to get away with."

"Do you realize that the charge against you is extremely serious?"

"I do."

"You've admitted that you sold the Metal to Ken Danagger.""I have."

"They might send you to jail for ten years,""I don't think they will, but it's possible."

"Have you been reading the newspapers, Henry?" asked Philip, with an oddkind of smile."No. "

"Oh, you should!""Should I? Why?"

"You ought to see the names they call you!"

"That's interesting," said Rearden; he said it about the fact thatPhilip's smile was one of pleasure.

"I don't understand it," said his mother. "Jail? Did you say jail,Lillian? Henry, are you going to be sent to jail?"

"I might be."

"But that's ridiculous' Do something about it.""What?"

"I don't know. I don't understand any of it. Respectable people don't goto jail. Do something. You've always known what to do about business.""Not this kind of business."

"I don't believe it." Her voice had the tone of a frightened, spoiledchild. "You're saying it just to be mean."

"He's playing the hero, Mother," said Lillian. She smiled coldly, turningto Rearden. "Don't you think that your attitude is perfectly futile?"

"No. "

"You know that cases of this kind are not . . . intended ever to come totrial. There are ways to avoid it, to get things settled amicably —if oneknows the right people."

"I don't know the right people."

"Look at Orren Boyle. He's done much more and much worse than your littlefling at the black market, but he's smart enough to keep himself out ofcourtrooms."

"Then I'm not smart enough."

"Don't you think it's time you made an effort to adjust yourself to theconditions of our age?""No. "

"Well, then I don't see how you can pretend that you're some sort ofvictim. If you go to jail, it will be your own fault.""What pretense are you talking about, Lillian?"

"Oh, I know that you think you're fighting for some sort of principle —butactually it's only a matter of your incredible conceit. You're doing it forno better reason than because you think you're right."

"Do you think they're right?"

She shrugged, "That's the conceit I'm talking about—the idea that itmatters who's right or wrong. It's the most insufferable form of vanity, thisinsistence on always doing right. How do you know what's right?

How can anyone ever know it? It's nothing but a delusion to flatter yourown ego and to hurt other people by flaunting your superiority over them."

He was looking at her with attentive interest. "Why should it hurt otherpeople, if it's nothing but a delusion?"

"Is it necessary for me to point out that in your case it's nothing buthypocrisy? That is why I find your attitude preposterous. Questions of righthave no bearing on human existence. And you're certainly nothing but human—aren't you, Henry? You're no better than any of the men you're going to facetomorrow. I think you should remember that it's not for you to make a standon any sort of principle. Maybe you're a victim in this particular mess,maybe they're pulling a rotten trick on you, but what of it? They're doing it

because they're weak; they couldn't resist the temptation to grab your Metaland to muscle in on your profits, because they had no other way of evergetting rich. Why should you blame them? It's only a question of differentstrains, but it s the same shoddy human fabric that gives way just asquickly. You wouldn't be tempted by money, because it's so easy for you tomake it.

But you wouldn't withstand other pressures and you'd fall just asignominiously. Wouldn't you? So you have no right to any righteousindignation against them. You have no moral superiority to assert or todefend. And if you haven't, then what is the point of fighting a battle thatyou can't win? I suppose that one might find some satisfaction in being amartyr, if one is above reproach. But you—who are you to cast the firststone?"

She paused to observe the effect. There was none, except that his look ofattentive interest seemed intensified; he listened as if he were held by someimpersonal, scientific curiosity. It was not the response she had expected.

"1 believe you understand me," she said.

"No," he answered quietly, "I don't."

"I think you should abandon the illusion of your own perfection, which youknow full well to be an illusion. I think you should learn to get along withother people. The day of the hero is past. This is the day of humanity, in amuch deeper sense than you imagine. Human beings are no longer expected to besaints nor to be punished for their sins. Nobody is right or wrong, we're allin it together, we're all human—and the human is the imperfect. You'll gainnothing tomorrow by proving that they're wrong. You ought to give in withgood grace, simply because it's the practical thing to do. You ought to keepsilent, precisely because they're wrong. They'll appreciate it. Makeconcessions for others and they'll make concessions for you. Live and letlive. Give and take. Give in and take in. That's the policy of our age—andit's time you accepted it. Don't tell me you're too good for it. You knowthat you're not. You know that I know it."

The look of his eyes, held raptly still upon some point in space, was notin answer to her words; it was in answer to a man's voice saying to him, "Doyou think that what you're facing is merely a conspiracy to seize yourwealth? You, who know the source of wealth, should know it's much more andmuch worse than that."

He turned to look at Lillian. He was seeing the full extent of herfailure—in the immensity of his own indifference. The droning stream of herinsults was like the sound of a distant riveting machine, a long, impotentpressure that reached nothing within him. He had heard her studied remindersof his guilt on every evening he had spent at home in the past three months.But guilt had been the one emotion he had found himself unable to feel. Thepunishment she had wanted to inflict on him was the torture of shame; whatshe had inflicted was the torture of boredom.

He remembered his brief glimpse—on that morning in the Wayne FalklandHotel—of a flaw in her scheme of punishment, which he had not examined. Nowhe stated it to himself for the first time. She wanted to force upon him thesuffering of dishonor—but his own sense of honor was her only weapon ofenforcement. She wanted to wrest from him an acknowledgment of his moraldepravity—but only his own moral rectitude could attach significance to sucha verdict. She wanted to injure him by her contempt—but he could not beinjured, unless he respected her judgment. She wanted to punish him for thepain he had caused her and she held her pain as a gun aimed at him, as if shewished to extort his agony at the point of his pity. But her only tool washis own benevolence, his concern for her, his compassion. Her only power wasthe power of his own virtues. What if he chose to withdraw it?

An issue of guilt, he thought, had to rest on his own acceptance of thecode of justice that pronounced him guilty. He did not accept it; he neverhad. His virtues, all the virtues she needed to achieve his punishment, camefrom another code and lived by another standard.

He felt no guilt, no shame, no regret, no dishonor. He felt no concern forany verdict she chose to pass upon him: he had lost respect for her judgmentlong ago. And the sole chain still holding him was only a last remnant ofpity.

But what was the code on which she acted? What sort of code permitted theconcept of a punishment that required the victim's own virtue as the fuel tomake it work? A code—he thought—which would destroy only those who tried toobserve it; a punishment, from which only the honest would suffer, while thedishonest would escape unhurt. Could one conceive of an infamy lower than toequate virtue with pain, to make virtue, not vice, the source and motivepower of suffering? If he were the kind of rotter she was struggling to makehim believe he was, then no issue of his honor and his moral worth wouldmatter to him. If he wasn't, then what was the nature of her attempt?

To count upon his virtue and use it as an instrument of torture, topractice blackmail with the victim's generosity as sole means of extortion,to accept the gift of a man's good will and turn it into a tool for thegiver's destruction ... he sat very still, contemplating the formula of somonstrous an evil that he was able to name it, but not to believe itpossible.

He sat very still, held by the hammering of a single question: Did Lillianknow the exact nature of her scheme?—was it a conscious policy, devised withfull awareness of its meaning? He shuddered; he did not hate her enough tobelieve it.

He looked at her. She was absorbed, at the moment, in the task of cuttinga plum pudding that stood as a mount of blue flame on a silver platter beforeher, its glow dancing over her face and her laughing mouth—she was plunging asilver knife into the flame, with a practiced, graceful curve of her arm. Shehad metallic leaves in the red, gold and brown colors of autumn scatteredover one shoulder of her black velvet gown; they glittered in thecandlelight.

He could not get rid of the impression, which he had kept receiving andrejecting for three months, that her vengeance was not a form of despair, ashe had supposed—the impression, which he regarded as inconceivable, that shewas enjoying it. He could find no trace of pain in her manner. She had an airof confidence new to her. She seemed to be at home in her house for the firsttime. Even though everything within the house was of her own choice andtaste, she had always seemed to act as the bright, efficient, resentfulmanager of a high-class hotel, who keeps smiling in bitter amusement at herposition of inferiority to the owners. The amusement remained, but thebitterness was gone. She had not gained weight, but her features had losttheir delicate sharpness in a blurring, softening look of satisfaction; evenher voice sounded as if it had grown plump.

He did not hear what she was saying; she was laughing in the last flickerof the blue flames, while he sat weighing the question: Did she know? He feltcertain that he had discovered a secret much greater than the problem of hismarriage, that he had grasped the formula of a policy practiced more widelythroughout the world than he dared to contemplate at the moment. But toconvict a human being of that practice was a verdict of irrevocabledamnation, and he knew that he would not believe it of anyone, so long as thepossibility of a doubt remained.

No—he thought, looking at Lillian, with the last effort of his generosity-he would not believe it of her. In the name of whatever grace and pride shepossessed—in the name of such moments when he had seen a smile of joy on her

face, the smile of a living being—in the name of the brief shadow of love hehad once felt for her—he would not pronounce upon her a verdict of totalevil.

The butter slipped a plate of plum pudding in front of him, and he heardLillian's voice: "Where have you been for the last five minutes, Henry—or isit for the last century? You haven't answered me. You haven't heard a word Isaid."

"I heard it," he answered quietly. "I don't know what you're trying toaccomplish."

"What a question!" said his mother. "Isn't that just like a man?She's trying to save you from going to jail—that's what she's trying toaccomplish."

That could be true, he thought; perhaps, by the reasoning of some crude,childish cowardice, the motive of their malice was a desire to protect him,to break him down into the safety of a compromise. It's possible, he thought—but knew that he did not believe it.

"You've always been unpopular," said Lillian, "and it's more than a matterof any one particular issue. It's that unyielding, intractable attitude ofyours. The men who're going to try you, know what you're thinking. That's whythey'll crack down on you, while they'd let another man off."

"Why, no. I don't think they know what I'm thinking. That's what I have tolet them know tomorrow."

"Unless you show them that you're willing to give in and co-operate, youwon't have a chance. You've been too hard to deal with."

"No. I've been too easy."

"But if they put you in jail," said his mother, "what's going to happen toyour family? Have you thought of that?""No. I haven't."

"Have you thought of the disgrace you'll bring upon us?""Mother, do you understand the issue in this case?"

"No, I don't and I-don't want to understand. It's all dirty business anddirty politics. All business is just dirty politics and all politics is justdirty business. I never did want to understand any of it. I don't care who'sright or wrong, but what I think a man ought to think of first is his family.Don't you know what this will do to us?"

"No, Mother, I don't know or care."

His mother looked at him, aghast.

"Well, I think you have a very provincial attitude, all of you," saidPhilip suddenly. "Nobody here seems to be concerned with the wider, socialaspects of the case. I don't agree with you, Lillian. I don't see why you saythat they're pulling some sort of rotten trick on Henry and that he's in theright. I think he's guilty as hell. Mother, I can explain the issue to youvery simply. There's nothing unusual about it, the courts are full of casesof this kind. Businessmen are taking advantage of the national emergency inorder to make money. They break the regulations which protect the commonwelfare of all—for the sake of their own personal gain. They're profiteers ofthe black market who grow rich by defrauding the poor of their rightfulshare, at a time of desperate shortage. They pursue a ruthless, grasping,grabbing, antisocial policy, based on nothing but plain, selfish greed. It'sno use pretending about it, we all know it—and I think it's contemptible."

He spoke in a careless, offhand manner, as if explaining the obvious to agroup of adolescents; his tone conveyed the assurance of a man who knows thatthe moral ground of his stand is not open to question.

Rearden sat looking at him, as if studying an object seen for the firsttime. Somewhere deep in Rearden's mind, as a steady, gentle, inexorable beat,was a man's voice, saying: By what right?—by what code?—

by what standard?

"Philip," he said, not raising his voice, "say any of that again and youwill find yourself out in the street, right now, with the suit you've got onyour back, with whatever change you've got in your pocket and with nothingelse. "

. He heard no answer, no sound, no movement. He noted that the stillnessof the three before him had no element of astonishment. The look of shock ontheir faces was not the shock of people at the sudden explosion of a bomb,but the shock of people who had known that they Were playing with a lightedfuse. There were no outcries, no protests, no questions; they knew that hemeant it and they knew everything it meant. A dim, sickening feeling told himthat they had known it long before he did.

"You . . . you wouldn't throw your own brother out on the street, wouldyou?" his mother said at last; it was not a demand, but a plea.

"I would."

"But he's your brother . . . Doesn't that mean anything to you?""No. "

"Maybe he goes a bit too far at times, but it's just loose talk, it's justthat modern jabber, he doesn't know what he's saying.""Then let him learn."

"Don't be hard on him . . .he's younger than you and . . . and weaker. He. . . Henry, don't look at me that way! I've never seen you look like that. .. . You shouldn't frighten him. You know that he needs you."

"Does he know it?"

"You can't be hard on a man who needs you, it will prey on your consciencefor the rest of your life.""It won't."

"You've got to be kind, Henry.""I'm not."

"You've got to have some pity.""I haven't."

"A good man knows how to forgive.""I don't."

"You wouldn't want me to think that you're selfish,""I am."

Philip's eyes were darting from one to the other. He looked like a man whohad felt certain that he stood on solid granite and had suddenly discoveredthat it was thin ice, now cracking open all around him.

"But I . . . " he tried, and stopped; his voice sounded like steps testingthe ice. "But don't I have any freedom of speech?"

"In your own house. Not in mine."

"Don't I have a right to my own ideas?"

"At your own expense. Not at mine."

"Don't you tolerate any differences of opinion?"

"Not when I'm paying the bills."

"Isn't there anything involved but money?"

"Yes. The fact that it's my money."

"Don't you want to consider any hi . . ."—he was going to say "higher,"but changed his mind—"any other aspects?""No. "

"But I'm not your slave.""Am I yours?"

"I don't know what you—" He stopped; he knew what was meant."No," said Rearden, "you're not my slave. You're free to walk out of hereany time you choose."

"I . . .I'm not speaking of that.""I am."

"I don't understand it . . ."

my political views. You've never "Don't you?""You've always known my .objected before."

"That's true," said Rearden gravely. "Perhaps I owe you an explanation, ifI have misled you. I've tried never to remind you that you're riving on mycharity. I thought that it was your place to remember it.

I thought that any human being who accepts the help of another, knows thatgood will is the giver's only motive and that good will is the payment heowes in return. But I see that I was wrong. You were getting your foodunearned and you concluded that affection did not have to be earned, either.You concluded that I was the safest person in the world for you to spit on,precisely because I held you by the throat. You concluded that I wouldn'twant to remind you of it and that I would be tied by the fear of hurting yourfeelings. All right, let's get it straight: you're an object of charity who'sexhausted his credit long ago.

Whatever affection I might have felt for you once, is gone. I haven't theslightest interest in you, your fate or your future. I haven't any reasonwhatever for wishing to feed you. If you leave my house, it won't make anydifference to me whether you starve or not. Now that is your position hereand I will expect you to remember it, if you wish to stay. If not, then getout. "

But for the movement of drawing his head a little into his shoulders,Philip showed no reaction. "Don't imagine that I enjoy living here," he said;his voice was lifeless and shrill. "If you think I'm happy, you're mistaken.I'd give anything to get away." The words pertained to defiance, but thevoice had a curiously cautious quality. "If that is how you feel about it, itwould be best for me to leave." The words were a statement, but the voice puta question mark at the end of it and waited; there was no answer. "Youneedn't worry about my future. I don't have to ask: favors of anybody. I cantake care of myself all right." The words were addressed to Rearden, but theeyes were looking at his mother; she did not speak; she was afraid to move."I've always wanted to be on my own. I've always wanted to live in New York,near all my friends." The voice slowed down and added in an impersonal,reflective manner, as if the words were not addressed to anyone, "Of course,I'd have the problem of maintaining a certain social position . . . it's notmy fault if I'll be embarrassed by a family name associated with amillionaire. ... I would need enough money for a year or two ... toestablish myself in a manner suitable to my—"

"You won't get it from me."

"I wasn't asking you for it, was 1? Don't imagine that I couldn't get itsomewhere else, if I wanted to! Don't imagine that I couldn't leave!

I'd go in a minute, if I had only myself to think about. But Mother needsme, and if I deserted her—"

"Don't explain."

"And besides, you misunderstood me, Henry. I haven't said anything toinsult you. I wasn't speaking in any personal way. I was only discussing thegeneral political picture from an abstract sociological viewpoint which—"

"Don't explain," said Rearden. He was looking at Philip's face. It washalf-lowered, its eyes looking up at him. The eyes were lifeless, as if theyhad witnessed nothing; they held no spark of excitement, no personalsensation, neither of defiance nor of regret, neither of shame nor ofsuffering; they were filmy ovals that held no response to reality, no attemptto understand it, to weigh it, to reach some verdict of justice —ovals thatheld nothing but a dull, still, mindless hatred. "Don't explain. Just keepyour mouth shut."

The revulsion that made Rearden turn his face away contained a spasm ofpity. There was an instant when he wanted to seize his brother's shoulders,

to shake him, to cry: How could you do this to yourself? How did you come toa stage where this is all that's left of you? Why did you let the wonderfulfact of your own existence go by?

. . . He looked away. He knew it was useless.

He noted, in weary contempt, that the three at the table remained silent.Through all the years past, his consideration for them had brought himnothing but their maliciously righteous reproaches. Where was theirrighteousness now? Now was the time to stand on their code of justice—ifjustice had been any part of their code. Why didn't they throw at him allthose accusations of cruelty and selfishness, which he had come to accept asthe eternal chorus to his life? What had permitted them to do it for years?He knew that the words he heard in his mind were the key to the answer: Thesanction of the victim.

"Don't let's quarrel," said his mother, her voice cheerless and vague.

"It's Thanksgiving Day."

When he looked at Lillian, he caught a glance that made him certain shehad watched him for a long time: its quality was panic.

He got up. "You will please excuse me now," he said to the table at large."Where are you going?" asked Lillian sharply.

He stood looking at her for a deliberate moment, as if to confirm themeaning she would read in his answer: "To New York."She jumped to her feet. "Tonight?""Now,"

"You can't go to New York tonight!" Her voice was not loud, but it had theimperious helplessness of a shriek. "This is not the time when you can affordit. When you can afford to desert your family, I mean.

You ought to think about the matter of clean hands. You're not in aposition to permit yourself anything which you know to be depravity."

By what code?—thought Rearden—by what standard?

"Why do you wish to go to New York tonight?"

"I think, Lillian, for the same reason that makes you wish to stop me.""Tomorrow is your trial.""That is what I mean."

He made a movement to turn, and she raised her voice: "I don't want you togo!" He smiled. It was the first time he had smiled at her in the past threemonths; it was not the kind of smile she could care to see. "I forbid you toleave us tonight!"

He turned and left the room.

Sitting at the wheel of his car, with the glassy, frozen road flying athis face and down under the wheels at sixty miles an hour, he let the thoughtof his family drop away from him—and the vision of their faces went rollingback into the abyss of speed that swallowed the bare Trees and lonelystructures of the roadside. There was little traffic, and few lights in thedistant clusters of the towns he passed; the emptiness of inactivity was theonly sign of a holiday. A hazy glow, rusted by frost, flashed above the roofof a factory once in a rare while, and a cold wind shrieked through thejoints of his car, beating the canvas top against the metal frame.

By some dim sense of contrast, which he did not define, the thought of hisfamily was replaced by the thought of his encounter with the Wet Nurse, theWashington boy of his mills.

At the time of his indictment, he had discovered that the boy had knownabout his deal with Danagger, yet had not reported it to anyone.

"Why didn't you inform your friends about me?" he had asked.

The boy had answered brusquely, not looking at him, "Didn't want to."

"It was part of your job to watch precisely for things of that kind,wasn't it?"

"Yeah."

"Besides, your friends would have been delighted to hear it.""I knew."

"Didn't you know what a valuable piece of information it was and what astupendous trade you could have pulled with those friends of yours inWashington whom you offered to me once—remember?—the friends who always'occasion expenses'?" The boy had not answered.

"It could have made your career at the very top level. Don't tell me thatyou didn't know it."

"I knew it."

"Then why didn't you make use of it?""I didn't want to.""Why not?""Don't know."

The boy had stood, glumly avoiding Rearden's eyes, as if trying to avoidsomething incomprehensible within himself. Rearden had laughed.

"Listen, Non-Absolute, you're playing with fire. Better go and murdersomebody fast, before you let it get you—that reason that stopped you fromturning informer—or else it will blast your career to hell."

The boy had not answered.

This morning, Rearden had gone to his office as usual, even though therest of the office building was closed. At lunch time, he had stopped at therolling mills and had been astonished to find the Wet Nurse standing there,alone in a corner, ignored by everybody, watching the work with an air ofchildish enjoyment.

"What are you doing here today?" Rearden had asked. "Don't you know it's aholiday?"

"Oh, I let the girls off, but I just came in to finish some business.""What business?"

"Oh, letters and . . . Oh, hell, I signed three letters and sharpened mypencils, I know I didn't have to do it today, but I had nothing to do at homeand ... I get lonesome away from this place."

"Don't you have any family?"

"No . . . not to speak of. What about you, Mr. Rearden? Don't you haveany?"

"I guess—not to speak of."

"I like this place. I like to hang around. . . . You know, Mr. Rearden,what I studied to be was a metallurgist."

Walking away, Rearden had turned to glance back and had caught the WetNurse looking after him as a boy would look at the hero of his childhood'sfavorite adventure story. God help the poor little bastard!

—he had thought.

God help them all—he thought, driving through the dark streets of a smalltown, borrowing, in contemptuous pity, the words of their belief which he hadnever shared. He saw newspapers displayed on metal stands, with the blackletters of headlines screaming to empty corners: "Railroad Disaster." He hadheard the news on the radio, that afternoon: there had been a wreck on themain line of Taggart Transcontinental, near Rockland, Wyoming; a split railhad sent a freight train crashing over the edge of a canyon. Wrecks on theTaggart main line were becoming more frequent—the track was wearing out—thetrack which, less than eighteen months ago, Dagny was planning to rebuild,promising him a journey from coast to coast on his own Metal.

She had spent a year, picking worn rail from abandoned branches to patchthe rail of the main line. She had spent months fighting the men of Jim'sBoard of Directors, who said that the national emergency was only temporaryand a track that had lasted for ten years could well last for another winter,until spring, when conditions would improve, as Mr. Wesley Mouch hadpromised. Three weeks ago, she had made them authorize the purchase of sixty

thousand tons of new rail; it could do no more than make a few patches acrossthe continent in the worst divisions, but it was all she had been able toobtain from them.

She had had to wrench the money out of men deaf with panic: the freightrevenues were falling at such a rate that the men of the Board had begun totremble, staring at Jim's idea of the most prosperous year in Taggarthistory. She had had to order steel rail, there was no hope of obtaining an"emergency need" permission to buy Rearden Metal and no time to beg for it.

Rearden looked away from the headlines to the glow at the edge of the sky,which was the city of New York far ahead; his hands tightened on the wheel alittle.

It was half past nine when he reached the city. Dagny's apartment wasdark, when he let himself in with his key. He picked up the telephone andcalled her office. Her own voice answered: "Taggart Transcontinental."

"Don't you know it's a holiday?" he asked.

"Hello, Hank. Railroads have no holidays. Where are you calling from?""Your place."

"I'll be through in another half-hour."

"It's all right. Stay there. I'll come for you."

The anteroom of her office was dark, when he entered, except for thelighted glass cubbyhole of Eddie Willers. Eddie was closing his desk, gettingready to leave. He looked at Rearden, in puzzled astonishment.

"Good evening, Eddie. What is it that keeps you people so busy—

the Rockland wreck?"

Eddie sighed. "Yes, Mr. Rearden."

"That's what I want to see Dagny about—about your rail.""She's still here."

He started toward her door, when Eddie called after him hesitantly, "Mr.Rearden . . ."

He stopped. "Yes?"

"I wanted to say . . . because tomorrow is your trial . . . and whateverthey do to you is supposed to be in the name of all the people ... I justwanted to say that I . . . that it won't be in my name . . .

even if there's nothing I can do about it, except to tell you . . . evenif I know that that doesn't mean anything."

"It means much more than you suspect. Perhaps more than any of us suspect.Thanks, Eddie."

Dagny glanced up from her desk, when Rearden entered her office; he sawher watching him as he approached and he saw the look of wearinessdisappearing from her eyes. He sat down on the edge of the desk. She leanedback, brushing a strand of hair off her face, her shoulders relaxing underher thin white blouse.

"Dagny, there's something I want to tell you about the rail that youordered. I want you to know this tonight."

She was watching him attentively; the expression of his face pulled hersinto the same look of quietly solemn tension.

"I am supposed to deliver to Taggart Transcontinental, on February'fifteenth, sixty thousand tons of rail, which is to give you three hundredmiles of track. You will receive—for the same sum of money—eighty thousandtons of rail, which will give you five hundred miles of track.

You know what material is cheaper and lighter than steel. Your rail willnot be steel, it will be Rearden Metal. Don't argue, object or agree.

I am not asking for your consent. You are not supposed to consent or toknow anything about it. I am doing this and I alone will be responsible.

We will work it so that those on your staff who'll know that you'veordered steel, won't know that you've received Rearden Metal, and thosewho'll know that you've received Rearden Metal, won't know that you had no

permit to buy it. We will tangle the bookkeeping in such a way that if thething should ever blow up, nobody will be able to pin anything on anybody,except on me. They might suspect that I bribed someone on your staff, or theymight suspect that you were hi on it, but they won't be able to prove it. Iwant you to give me your word that you will never admit it, no matter whathappens. It's my Metal, and if there are any chances to take, it's I who'lltake them. I have been planning this from the day I received your order. Ihave ordered the copper for it, from a source which will not betray me. I didnot intend to tell you about it till later, but I changed my mind. I want youto know it tonight—because I am going on trial tomorrow for the same kind ofcrime."

She had listened without moving. At his last sentence, he saw a faintcontraction of her cheeks and lips; it was not quite a smile, but it gave himher whole answer: pain, admiration, understanding.

Then he saw her eyes becoming softer, more painfully, dangerously alive—hetook her wrist, as if the tight grasp of his fingers and the severity of hisglance were to give her the support she needed—and he said sternly, "Don'tthank me—this is not a favor—I am doing it in order to be able to bear mywork, or else I'll break like Ken Danagger."

She whispered, "AH right, Hank, I won't thank you," the tone of her voiceand the look of her eyes making it a lie by the time it was uttered.

He smiled. "Give me the word I asked."

She inclined her head. "I give you my word." He released her wrist.

She added, not raising her head, "The only thing I'll say is that if theysentence you to jail tomorrow, I'll quit—without waiting for any destroyer toprompt me."

"You won't. And I don't think they'll sentence me to jail. I think they'lllet me off very lightly. I have a hypothesis about it—I'll explain it to youafterwards, when I've put it to the test."

"What hypothesis?"

"Who is John Gait?" He smiled, and stood up. "That's all. We won't talkany further about my trial, tonight. You don't happen to have anything todrink in your office, have you?"

"No. But I think my traffic manager has some sort of a bar on one shelf ofhis filing closet."

"Do you think you could steal a drink for me, if he doesn't have itlocked?"

"I'll try."

He stood looking at the portrait of Nat Taggart on the wall of her office—the portrait of a young man with a lifted head—until she returned, bringing abottle of brandy and two glasses. He filled the glasses in silence.

"You know, Dagny, Thanksgiving was a holiday established by productivepeople to celebrate the success of their work."

The movement of his arm, as he raised his glass, went from the portrait—toher—to himself— to the buildings of the city beyond the window.

For a month in advance, the people who filled the courtroom had been toldby the press that they would see the man who was a greedy enemy of society;but they had come to see the man who had invented Rearden Metal.

He stood up, when the judges called upon him to do so. He wore a graysuit, he had pale blue eyes and blond hair; it was not the colors that madehis figure seem icily implacable, it was the fact that the suit had anexpensive simplicity seldom flaunted these days, that it belonged in thesternly luxurious office of a rich corporation, that his bearing came from acivilized era and clashed with the place around him.

The crowd knew from the newspapers that he represented the evil ofruthless wealth; and—as they praised the virtue of chastity, then ran to seeany movie that displayed a half-naked female on its posters—so they came to

see him; evil, at least, did not have the stale hopelessness of a bromidewhich none believed and none dared to challenge. They looked at him withoutadmiration—admiration was a feeling they had lost the capacity to experience,long ago; they looked with curiosity and with a dim sense of defiance againstthose who had told them that it was their duty to hate him.

A few years ago, they would have jeered at his air of self-confidentwealth. But today, there was a slate-gray sky in the windows of thecourtroom, which promised the first snowstorm of a long, hard winter; thelast of the country's oil was vanishing, and the coal mines were not able tokeep up with the hysterical scramble for winter supplies. The crowd in thecourtroom remembered that this was the case which had cost them the servicesof Ken Danagger. There were rumors that the output of the Danagger CoalCompany had fallen perceptibly within one month; the newspapers said that itwas merely a matter of readjustment while Danagger's cousin was reorganizingthe company he had taken over. Last week, the front pages had carried thestory of a catastrophe on the site of a housing project under construction:defective steel girders had collapsed, killing four workmen; the newspapershad not mentioned, but the crowd knew, that the girders had come from OrrenBoyle's Associated Steel.

They sat in the courtroom in heavy silence and they looked at the tall,gray figure, not with hope—they were losing the capacity to hope —but with animpassive neutrality spiked by a faint question mark; the question mark wasplaced over all the pious slogans they had heard for years.

The newspapers had snarled that the cause of the country's troubles, asthis case demonstrated, was the selfish greed of rich industrialists; that itwas men like Hank Rearden who were to blame for the shrinking diet, thefalling temperature and the cracking roofs in the homes of the nation; thatif it had not been for men who broke regulations and hampered thegovernment's plans, prosperity would have been achieved long ago; and that aman like Hank Rearden was prompted by nothing but the profit motive. Thislast was stated without explanation or elaboration, as if the words "profitmotive" were the self-evident brand of ultimate evil.

The crowd remembered that these same newspapers, less than two years ago,had screamed that the production of Rearden Metal should be forbidden,because its producer was endangering people's lives for the sake of hisgreed; they remembered that the man in gray had ridden in the cab of thefirst engine to run over a track of his own Metal; and that he was now ontrial for the greedy crime of withholding from the public a load of the Metalwhich it had been his greedy crime to offer in the public market.

According to the procedure established by directives, cases of this kindwere not tried by a jury, but by a panel of three judges appointed by theBureau of Economic Planning and National Resources; the procedure, thedirectives had stated, was to be informal and democratic.

The judge's bench had been removed from the old Philadelphia courtroom forthis occasion, and replaced by a table on a wooden platform; it gave the rooman atmosphere suggesting the kind of meeting where a presiding body putssomething over on a mentally retarded membership.

One of the judges, acting as prosecutor, had read the charges. "You maynow offer whatever plea you wish to make in your own defense,"

he announced.

Facing the platform, his voice inflectionless and peculiarly clear, HankRearden answered: "I have no defense."

"Do you—" The judge stumbled; he had not expected it to be that easy. "Doyou throw yourself upon the mercy of this court?"

"I do not recognize this court's right to try me."

"What?"

"I do not recognize this court's right to try me."

"But, Mr. Rearden, this is the legally appointed court to try thisparticular category of crime."

"I do not recognize my action as a crime,"

"But you have admitted that you have broken our regulations controllingthe sale of your Metal."

"I do not recognize your right to control the sale of my Metal."

"Is it necessary for me to point out that your recognition was notrequired?"

"No. I am fully aware of it and I am acting accordingly."

He noted the stillness of the room. By the rules of the complicatedpretense which all those people played for one another's benefit, they shouldhave considered his stand as incomprehensible folly; there should have beenrustles of astonishment and derision; there were none; they sat still; theyunderstood.

"Do you mean that you are refusing to obey the law?" asked the judge.

"No. I am complying with the law—to the letter. Your law holds that mylife, my work and my property may be disposed of without my consent. Verywell, you may now dispose of me without my participation in the matter. Iwill not play the part of defending myself, where no defense is possible, andI will not simulate the illusion of dealing with a tribunal of justice."

"But, Mr. Rearden, the law provides specifically that you are to be givenan opportunity to present your side of the case and to defend yourself."

"A prisoner brought to trial can defend himself only if there is anobjective principle of justice recognized by his judges, a principleupholding his rights, which they may not violate and which he can invoke.

The law, by which you are trying me, holds that there are no principles,that I have no rights and that you may do with me whatever you please. Verywell. Do it."

"Mr. Rearden, the law which you are denouncing is based on the highestprinciple—the principle of the public good."

"Who is the public? What does it hold as its good? There was a time whenmen believed that the good' was a concept to be defined by a code of moralvalues and that no man had the right to seek his good through the violationof the rights of another. If it is now believed that my fellow men maysacrifice me in any manner they please for the sake of whatever they deem tobe their own good, if they believe that they may seize my property simplybecause they need it—well, so does any burglar. There is only thisdifference: the burglar does not ask me to sanction his act."

A group of seats at the side of the courtroom was reserved for theprominent visitors who had come from New York to witness the trial. Dagny satmotionless and her face showed nothing but a solemn attention, the attentionof listening with the knowledge that the flow of his words would determinethe course of her life. Eddie Willers sat beside her. James Taggart had notcome. Paul Larkin sat hunched forward, his face thrust out, pointed like ananimal's muzzle, sharpened by a look of fear now turning into malicioushatred. Mr. Mowen, who sat beside him, was a man of greater innocence andsmaller understanding; his fear was of a simpler nature; he listened inbewildered indignation and he whispered to Larkin, "Good God, now he's doneit! Now he'll convince the whole country that all businessmen are enemies ofthe public good!"

"Are we to understand," asked the judge, "that you hold your own interestsabove the interests of the public?"

"I hold that such a question can never arise except in a society ofcannibals."

"What . . . what do you mean?"

"I hold that there is no clash of interests among men who do not demandthe unearned and do not practice human sacrifices."

"Are we to understand that if the public deems it necessary to curtailyour profits, you do not recognize its right to do so?"

"Why, yes, I do. The public may curtail my profits any time it wishes—byrefusing to buy my product."

"We are speaking of . . . other methods."

"Any other method of curtailing profits is the method of looters —and Irecognize it as such."

"Mr. Rearden, this is hardly the way to defend yourself.""I said that I would not defend myself."

"But this is unheard of! Do you realize the gravity of the charge againstyou?"

"I do not care to consider it."

"Do you realize the possible consequences of your stand?""Fully. "

"It is the opinion of this court that the facts presented by theprosecution seem to warrant no leniency. The penalty which this court has thepower to impose on you is extremely severe."

"Go ahead."

"I beg your pardon?"

"Impose it."

The three judges looked at one another. Then their spokesman turned backto Rearden. "This is unprecedented," he said.

"It is completely irregular," said the second judge. "The law requires youto submit a plea in your own defense. Your only alternative is to state forthe record that you throw yourself upon the mercy of the court."

"I do not."

"But you have to."

"Do you mean that what you expect from me is some sort of voluntaryaction?""Yes."

"I volunteer nothing."

"But the law demands that the defendant's side be represented on therecord."

"Do you mean that you need my help to make this procedure legal?""Well, no . . . yes . . . that is, to complete the form.""I will not help you."

The third and youngest judge, who had acted as prosecutor, snappedimpatiently, "This is ridiculous and unfair! Do you want to let it look as ifa man of your prominence had been railroaded without a—" He cut himself offshort. Somebody at the back of the courtroom emitted a long whistle.

"I want, " said Rearden gravely, "to let the nature of this procedureappear exactly for what it is. If you need my help to disguise it—I will nothelp you."

"But we are giving you a chance to defend yourself—and it is you who arerej ecting it."

"I will not help you to pretend that I have a chance. I will not help youto preserve an appearance of righteousness where rights are not recognized. Iwill not help you to preserve an appearance of rationality by entering adebate in which a gun is the final argument. I will not help you to pretendthat you are administering justice."

"But the law compels you to volunteer a defense!"

There was laughter at the back of the courtroom.

"That is the flaw in your theory, gentlemen," said Rearden gravely, "and Iwill not help you out of it. If you choose to deal with men by means ofcompulsion, do so. But you will discover that you need the voluntary co-operation of your victims, in many more ways than you can see at present. Andyour victims should discover that it is their own volition—which you cannot

force—that makes you possible. I choose to be consistent and I will obey youin the manner you demand. Whatever you wish me to do, I will do it at thepoint of a gun. If you sentence me to jail, you will have to send armed mento carry me there—I will not volunteer to move. If you fine me, you will haveto seize my property to collect the fine—I will not volunteer to pay it. Ifyou believe that you have the right to force me—use your guns openly. I willnot help you to disguise the nature of your action."

The eldest judge leaned forward across the table and his voice becamesuavely derisive: "You speak as if you were fighting for some sort ofprinciple, Mr. Rearden, but what you're actually fighting for is only yourproperty, isn't it?"

"Yes, of course. I am fighting for my property. Do you know the kind ofprinciple that represents?"

"You pose as a champion of freedom, but it's only the freedom to makemoney that you're after."

"Yes, of course. AH I want is the freedom to make money. Do you know whatthat freedom implies?"

"Surely, Mr. Rearden, you wouldn't want your attitude to be misunderstood.You wouldn't want to give support to the widespread impression that you are aman devoid of social conscience, who feels no concern for the welfare of hisfellows and works for nothing but his own profit."

"I work for nothing but my own profit. I earn it."

There was a gasp, not of indignation, but of astonishment, in the crowdbehind him and silence from the judges he faced. He went on calmly: "No, I donot want my attitude to be misunderstood. I shall be glad to state it for therecord. I am in full agreement with the facts of everything said about me inthe newspapers—with the facts, but not with the evaluation. I work fornothing but my own profit—which I make by selling a product they need to menwho are willing and able to buy it. I do not produce it for their benefit atthe expense of mine, and they do not buy it for my benefit at the expense oftheirs; I do not sacrifice my interests to them nor do they sacrifice theirsto me; we deal as equals by mutual consent to mutual advantage—and I am proudof every penny that I have earned in this manner. I am rich and I am proud ofevery penny I own. I have made my money by my own effort, in free exchangeand through the voluntary consent of every man I dealt with—the voluntaryconsent of those who employed me when I started, the voluntary consent ofthose who work for me now, the voluntary consent of those who buy my product.I shall answer all the questions you are afraid to ask me openly. Do I wishto pay my workers more than their services are worth to me? I do not. Do Iwish to sell my product for less than my customers are willing to pay me? Ido not. Do I wish to sell it at a loss or give it away? I do not. If this isevil, do whatever you please about me, according to whatever standards youhold. These are mine. I am earning my own living, as every honest man must. Irefuse to accept as guilt the fact of my own existence and the fact that Imust work in order to support it. I refuse to accept as guilt the fact that Iam able to do it and to do it well. I refuse to accept as guilt the fact thatI am able to do it better than most people—the fact that my work is ofgreater value than the work of my neighbors and that more men are willing topay I refuse to apologize for my ability—I refuse to apologize for my me.

success—I refuse to apologize for my money. If this is evil, make the mostof it. If this is what the public finds harmful to its interests, let thepublic destroy me. This is my code—and I will accept no other.

I could say to you that I have done more good for my fellow men than youcan ever hope to accomplish—but I will not say it, because I do not seek thegood of others as a sanction for my right to exist, nor do I recognize thegood of others as a justification for their seizure of my property or theirdestruction of my life. I will not say that the good of others was the

purpose of my work—my own good was my purpose, and I despise the man whosurrenders his. I could say to you that you do not serve the public good—thatnobody's good can be achieved at the price of human sacrifices—that when youviolate the rights of one man, you have violated the rights of all, and apublic of rightless creatures is doomed to destruction. I could say to youthat you will and can achieve nothing but universal devastation—as any lootermust, when he runs out of victims. I could say it, but I won't.

It is not your particular policy that I challenge, but your moral premise.

If it were true that men could achieve their good by means of turning somemen into sacrificial animals, and I were asked to immolate myself for thesake of creatures who wanted to survive at the price of my blood, if I wereasked to serve the interests of society apart from, above and against my own—I would refuse, I would reject it as the most contemptible evil, I wouldfight it with every, power I possess, I would fight the whole of mankind, ifone minute were all I could last before I were murdered, I would fight in thefull confidence of the justice of my battle and of a living being's right toexist. Let there be no misunderstanding about me. If it is now the belief ofmy fellow men, who call themselves the public, that their good requiresvictims, then I say: The public good be damned, I will have no part of it!"

The crowd burst into applause.

Rearden whirled around, more startled than his judges. He saw faces thatlaughed in violent excitement, and faces that pleaded for help; he saw theirsilent despair breaking out into the open; he saw the same anger andindignation as his own, finding release in the wild defiance of theircheering; he saw the looks of admiration and the looks of hope. There werealso the faces of loose-mouthed young men and maliciously unkempt females,the kind who led the booing in newsreel theaters at any appearance of abusinessman on the screen; they did not attempt a counter-demonstration; theywere silent.

As he looked at the crowd, people saw in his face what the threats of thejudges had not been able to evoke: the first sign of emotion.

It was a few moments before they heard the furious beating of a gavel uponthe table and one of the judges yelling: "—or I shall have the courtroomcleared!"

As he turned back to the table, Rearden's eyes moved over the visitors'section. His glance paused on Dagny, a pause perceptible only to her, as ifhe were saying: It works. She would have appeared calm except that her eyesseemed to have become too large for her face.

Eddie Willers was smiling the kind of smile that is a man's substitute forbreaking into tears. Mr. Mowen looked stupefied. Paul Larkin was staring atthe floor. There was no expression on Bertram Scudder's face on Lillian's.She sat at the end of a row, her legs crossed, a mink stole slanting from herright shoulder to her left hip; she looked at Rearden, not moving.

In the complex violence of all the things he felt, he had time torecognize a touch of regret and of longing: there was a face he had hoped tosee, had looked for from the start of the session, had wanted to be presentmore than any other face around him. But Francisco d'Anconia had not come.

4LMr. Rearden," said the eldest judge, smiling affably, reproachfully andspreading his arms, "it is regrettable that you should have misunderstood usso completely. That's the trouble—that businessmen refuse to approach us in aspirit of trust and friendship. They seem to imagine that we are theirenemies. Why do you speak of human sacrifices? What made you go to such anextreme? We have no intention of seizing your property or destroying yourlife. We do not seek to harm your interests. We are fully aware of yourdistinguished achievements. Our purpose is only to balance social pressuresand do justice to all. This hearing is really intended, not as a trial, butas a friendly discussion aimed at mutual understanding and co-operation."

"I do not co-operate at the point of a gun."

"Why speak of guns? This matter is not serious enough to warrant suchreferences. We are fully aware that the guilt in this case lies chiefly withMr. Kenneth Danagger, who instigated this infringement of the law, whoexerted pressure upon you and who confessed his guilt by disappearing inorder to escape trial"

"No. We did it by equal, mutual, voluntary agreement."

"Mr. Rearden," said the second judge, "you may not share some of ourideas, but when all is said and done, we're all working for the same cause.For the good of the people. We realize that you were prompted to disregardlegal technicalities by the critical situation of the coal mines and thecrucial importance of fuel to the public welfare."

"No. I was prompted by my own profit and my own interests.

What effect it had on the coal mines and the public welfare is for you toestimate. That was not my motive."

Mr. Mowen stared dazedly about him and whispered to Paul Larkin,"Something's gone screwy here."

"Oh, shut up!" snapped Larkin.

"I am sure, Mr. Rearden," said the eldest judge, "that you do not reallybelieve—nor docs the public—that we wish to treat you as a sacrificialvictim. If anyone has been laboring under such a misapprehension, we areanxious to prove that it is not true."

The judges retired to consider their verdict. They did not stay out long.They returned to an ominously silent courtroom—and announced that a fine of$5,000 was imposed on Henry Rearden, but that the sentence was suspended.

Streaks of jeering laughter ran through the applause that swept thecourtroom. The applause was aimed at Rearden, the laughter—at the judges.

Rearden stood motionless, not turning to the crowd, barely hearing theapplause. He stood looking at the judges. There was no triumph in his face,no elation, only the still intensity of contemplating a vision with a bitterwonder that was almost fear. He was seeing the enormity of the smallness ofthe enemy who was destroying the world. He felt as if, after a journey ofyears through a landscape of devastation, past the ruins of great factories,the wrecks of powerful engines, the bodies of invincible men, he had comeupon the despoiler, expecting to find a giant—and had found a rat eager toscurry for cover at the first sound of a human step. If this is what hasbeaten us, he thought, the guilt is ours.

He was jolted back into the courtroom by the people pressing to surroundhim. He smiled in answer to their smiles, to the frantic, tragic eagerness oftheir faces; there was a touch of sadness in his smile.

"God bless you, Mr. Rearden!" said an old woman with a ragged shawl overher head. "Can't you save us, Mr. Rearden? They're eating us alive, and it'sno use fooling anybody about how it's the rich that they're after—do you knowwhat's happening to us?"

"Listen, Mr. Rearden," said a man who looked like a factory worker, "it'sthe rich who're selling us down the river. Tell those wealthy bastards,who're so anxious to give everything away, that when they give away theirpalaces, they're giving away the skin off our backs."

"I know it," said Rearden.

The guilt is ours, he thought. If we who were the movers, the providers,the benefactors of mankind, were willing to let the brand of evil be stampedupon us and silently to bear punishment for our virtues—what sort of "good"did we expect to triumph in the world?

He looked at the people around him. They had cheered him today; they hadcheered him by the side of the track of the John Gait Line.

But tomorrow they would clamor for a new directive from Wesley Mouch and afree housing project from Orren Boyle, while Boyle's girders collapsed upon

their heads. They would do it, because they would be told to forget, as asin, that which had made them cheer Hank Rearden.

Why were they ready to renounce their highest moments as a sin?

Why were they willing to betray the best within them? What made thembelieve that this earth was a realm of evil where despair was their naturalfate? He could not name the reason, but he knew that it had to be named. Hefelt it as a huge question mark within the courtroom, which it was now hisduty to answer.

This was the real sentence imposed upon him, he thought—to discover whatidea, what simple idea available to the simplest man, had made mankind acceptthe doctrines that led it to self-destruction.

"Hank, I'll never think that it's hopeless, not ever again," said Dagnythat evening, after the trial. "I'll never be tempted to quit. You've provedthat the right always works and always wins—" She stopped, then added, "—provided one knows what is the right."

Lillian said to him at dinner next day, "So you've won, have you?"

Her voice was noncommittal; she said nothing else; she was watching him,as If studying a riddle.

The Wet Nurse asked him at the mills, "Mr. Rearden, what's a moralpremise?" "What you're going to have a lot of trouble with."

The boy frowned, then shrugged and said, laughing, "God, that was awonderful show! What a beating you gave them, Mr. Rearden! I sat by the radioand howled." "How do you know it was a beating?" "Well, it was, wasn't it?""Are you sure of it?" "Sure I'm sure." "The thing that makes you sure is amoral premise."

The newspapers were silent. After the exaggerated attention they had givento the case, they acted as if the trial were not worthy of notice. Theyprinted brief accounts on unlikely pages, worded in such generalities that noreader could discover any hint of a controversial issue.

The businessmen he met seemed to wish to evade the subject of his trial.Some made no comment at all, but turned away, their faces showing a peculiarresentment under the effort to appear noncommittal, as if they feared thatthe mere act of looking at him would be interpreted as taking a stand. Othersventured to comment: "In my opinion, Rearden, it was extremely unwise of you.. . . It seems to me that this is hardly the time to make enemies. ... Wecan't afford to arouse resentment."

"Whose resentment?" he asked.

"I don't think the government will like it.""You saw the consequences of that"

"Well, I don't know . . . The public won't take it, there's bound to be alot of indignation."

"You saw how the public took it."

"Well, I don't know . . . We've been trying hard not to give any groundsfor all those accusations about selfish greed—and you've given ammunition tothe enemy."

"Would you rather agree with the enemy that you have no right to yourprofits and your property?"

"Oh, no, no, certainly not—but why go to extremes? There's always a middleground."

"A middle ground between you and your murderers?""Now why use such words?"

"What I said at the trial, was it true or not?""It's going to be misquoted and misunderstood.""Was it true or not?"

"The public is too dumb to grapple with such issues.""Was it true or not?"

"It's no time to boast about being rich—when the populace is starving.It's just goading them on to seize everything."

"But telling them that you have no right to your wealth, while they have-is what's going to restrain them?"

"Well, I don't know ..."

"I don't like the things you said at your trial," said another man.

"In my opinion, I don't agree with you at all. Personally, I'm proud tobelieve that I am working for the public good, not just for my own profit. Ilike to think that I have some goal higher than just earning my three meals aday and my Hammond limousine."

"And I don't like that idea about no directives and no controls,"

said another. "I grant you they're running hog-wild and overdoing it.

But—no controls at all? I don't go along with that. I think some controlsare necessary. The ones which are for the public good."

"I am sorry, gentlemen," said Rearden, "that I will be obliged to saveyour goddamn necks along with mine."

A group of businessmen headed by Mr. Mowen did not issue any statementsabout the trial. But a week later they announced, with an inordinate amountof publicity, that they were endowing the construction of a playground forthe children of the unemployed.

Bertram Scudder did not mention the trial in his column. But ten dayslater, he wrote, among items of miscellaneous gossip: "Some idea of thepublic value of Mr. Hank Rearden may be gathered from the fact that of allsocial groups, he seems to be most unpopular with his own fellow businessmen.His old-fashioned brand of ruthlessness seems to be too much even for thosepredatory barons of profit."

On an evening in December—when the street beyond his window was like acongested throat coughing with the horns of pre-Christmas traffic—Rearden satin his room at the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, fighting an enemy more dangerousthan weariness or fear: revulsion against the thought of having to deal withhuman beings.

He sat, unwilling to venture into the streets of the city, unwilling tomove, as if he were chained to his chair and to this room. He had tried forhours to ignore an emotion that felt like the pull of homesickness: hisawareness that the only man whom he longed to see, was here, in this hotel,just a few floors above him.

He had caught himself, in the past few weeks, wasting time in the lobbywhenever he entered the hotel or left it, loitering unnecessarily at the mailcounter or the newsstand, watching the hurried currents of people, hoping tosee Francisco d'Anconia among them. He had caught himself eating solitarydinners in the restaurant of the Wayne-Falkland, with his eyes on thecurtains of the entrance doorway, Now he caught himself sitting in his room,thinking that the distance was only a few floors.

He rose to his feet, with a chuckle of amused indignation; he was acting,he thought, like a woman who waits for a telephone call and fights againstthe temptation to end the torture by making the first move. There was noreason, he thought, why he could not go to Francisco d'Anconia, if that waswhat he wanted. Yet when he told himself that he would, he felt somedangerous element of surrender in the intensity of his own relief.

He made a step toward the phone, to call Francisco's suite, but stopped.It was not what he wanted; what he wanted was simply to walk in, unannounced,as Francisco had walked into his office; it was this that seemed to statesome unstated right between them.

On his way to the elevator, he thought: He won't be in or, if he is,you'll probably find him entertaining some floozie, which will serve youright. But the thought seemed unreal, he could not make it apply to the manhe had seen at the mouth of the furnace—he stood confidently in the elevator,

looking up—he walked confidently down the hall, feeling his bitterness relaxinto gaiety—he knocked at the door.

Francisco's voice snapped, "Come in!" It had a brusque, absentmindedsound.

Rearden opened the door and stopped on the threshold. One of the hotel'scostliest satin-shaded lamps stood in the middle of the floor, throwing acircle of light on wide sheets of drafting paper. Francisco d'Anconia, inshirt sleeves, a strand of hair hanging down over his face, lay stretched onthe floor, on his stomach, propped up by his elbows, biting the end of apencil in concentration upon some point of the intricate tracing before him.He did not look up, he seemed to have forgotten the knock. Rearden tried todistinguish the drawing: it looked like the section of a smelter. He stoodwatching in startled wonder; had he had the power to bring into reality hisown image of Francisco d'Anconia, this was the picture he would have seen:the figure of a purposeful young worker intent upon a difficult task, In amoment, Francisco raised his head. In the next instant, he flung his bodyupward to a kneeling posture, looking at Rearden with a smile of incredulouspleasure. In the next, he seized the drawings and threw them aside toohastily, face down.

"What did I interrupt?" asked Rearden.

"Nothing much. Come in." He was grinning happily. Rearden felt suddenlycertain that Francisco had waited, too, had waited for this as for a victorywhich he had not quite hoped to achieve.

"What were you doing?" asked Rearden.

"Just amusing myself."

"Let me see it."

"No." He rose and kicked the drawings aside.

Rearden noted that if he had resented as impertinence Francisco's mannerof proprietorship in his office, he himself was now guilty of the sameattitude—because he offered no explanation for his visit, but crossed theroom and sat down in an armchair, casually, as if he were at home.

"Why didn't you come to continue what you had started?" he asked.

"You have been continuing it brilliantly without my help."

"Do you mean, my trial?"

"I mean, your trial."

"How do you know? You weren't there."

Francisco smiled, because the tone of the voice confessed an addedsentence: I was looking for you. "Don't you suppose I heard every word of iton the radio?"

"You did? Well, how did you like hearing your own lines come over the air,with me as your stooge?"

"You weren't, Mr. Rearden. They weren't my lines. Weren't they the thingsyou had always lived by?"

"Yes."

"I only helped you to see that you should have been proud to live bythem."

"I am glad you heard it"

"It was great, Mr. Rearden—and about three generations too late.""What do you mean?"

"If one single businessman had had the courage, then, to say that heworked for nothing but his own profit—and to say it proudly—he would havesaved the world."

"I haven't given up the world as lost."

"It isn't. It never can be. But oh God!—what he would have spared us!""Well, I guess we have to fight, no matter what era we're caught in."

"Yes . . . You know, Mr. Rearden, I would suggest that you get atranscript of your trial and read what you said. Then see whether you arepracticing it fully and consistently—or not."

"You mean that I'm not?"

"See for yourself."

"I know that you had a great deal to tell me, when we were interrupted,that night at the mills. Why don't you finish what you had to say?""No. It's too soon."

Francisco acted as if there were nothing unusual about this visit, as ifhe took it as a matter of natural course—as he had always acted in Rearden'spresence. But Rearden noted that he was not so calm as he wished to appear;he was pacing the room, in a manner that seemed a release for an emotion hedid not want to confess; he had forgotten the lamp and it still stood on thefloor as the room's sole illumination.

"You've been taking an awful beating in the way of discoveries, haven'tyou?" said Francisco, "How did you like the behavior of your fellowbusinessmen?"

"I suppose it was to be expected."

His voice tense with the anger of compassion, Francisco said, "It's beentwelve years and yet I'm still unable to see it indifferently!" The sentencesounded involuntary, as if, trying to suppress the sound of emotion, he haduttered suppressed words.

"Twelve years—since what?" asked Rearden.

There was an instant's pause, but Francisco answered calmly, "Since Iunderstood what those men were doing," He added, "I know what you're goingthrough right now . . . and what's still ahead."

"Thanks," said Rearden.

"For what?"

"For what you're trying so hard not to show. But don't worry about me. I'mstill able to stand it. . . . You know, I didn't come here because I wantedto talk about myself or even about the trial."

"I'll agree to any subject you choose—in order to have you here."

He said it in the tone of a courteous joke; but the tone could notdisguise it; he meant it. "What did you want to talk about?"

"You. "

Francisco stopped. He looked at Rearden for a moment, then answeredquietly, "All right."

If that which Rearden felt could have gone directly into words, past thebarrier of his will, he would have cried: Don't let me down—I need you—I amfighting all of them, I have fought to my limit and am condemned to fightbeyond it—and, as sole ammunition possible to me, I need the knowledge of onesingle man whom I can trust, respect and admire.

Instead, he said calmly, very simply—and the only note of a personal bondbetween them was that tone of sincerity which comes with a direct,unqualifiedly rational statement and implies the same honesty of mind in thelistener—"You know, I think that the only real moral crime that one man cancommit against another is the attempt to create, by his words or actions, animpression of the contradictory, the impossible, the irrational, and thusshake the concept of rationality in his victim."

"That's true."

"If I say that that is the dilemma you've put me in, would you help me byanswering a personal question?""I will try."

"I don't have to tell you—I think you know it—that you are the man of thehighest mind I have ever met. I am coming to accept, not as right, but atleast as possible, the fact that you refuse to exercise your great ability inthe world of today. But what a man does out of despair, is not necessarily a

key to his character. I have always thought that the real key is in thatwhich he seeks for his enjoyment.

And this is what I find inconceivable: no matter what you've given up, solong as you chose to remain alive, how can you find any pleasure in spendinga life as valuable as yours on running after cheap women and on an imbecile'sidea of diversions?"

Francisco looked at him with a fine smile of amusement, as if saying: No?You didn't want to talk about yourself? And what is it that you're confessingbut the desperate loneliness which makes the question of my character moreimportant to you than any other question right now?

The smile merged into a soft, good-natured chuckle, as if the questioninvolved no problem for him, no painful secret to reveal. "There's a way tosolve every dilemma of that kind, Mr. Rearden. Check your premises." He satdown on the floor, settling himself gaily, informally, for a conversation hewould enjoy. "Is it your own first-hand conclusion that I am a man of highmind?"

"Yes . "

"Do you know of your own first-hand knowledge that I spend my life runningafter women?"

"You've never denied it."

"Denied it? I've gone to a lot of trouble to create that impression.""Do you mean to say that it isn't true?"

"Do I strike you as a man with a miserable inferiority complex?""Good God, no!"

"Only that kind of man spends his life running after women.""What do you mean?"

"Do you remember what I said about money and about the men who seek toreverse the law of cause and effect? The men who try to replace the mind byseizing the products of the mind? Well, the mail who despises himself triesto gain self-esteem from sexual adventures —which can't be done, because sexis not the cause, but an effect and an expression of a man's sense of his ownvalue. "

"You'd better explain that."

"Did it ever occur to you that it's the same issue? The men who think thatwealth comes from material resources and has no intellectual root or meaning,are the men who think—for the same reason—that sex is a physical capacitywhich functions independently of one's mind, choice or code of values. Theythink that your body creates a desire and makes a choice for you—just aboutin some such way as if iron ore transformed itself into railroad rails of itsown volition. Love is blind, they say; sex is impervious to reason and mocksthe power of all philosophers. But, in fact, a man's sexual choice is theresult and the sum of his fundamental convictions. Tell me what a man findssexually attractive and I will tell you his entire philosophy of life.

Show me the woman he sleeps with and I will tell you his valuation ofhimself. No matter what corruption he's taught about the virtue ofselflessness, sex is the most profoundly selfish of all acts, an act which hecannot perform for any motive but his own enjoyment—just try to think ofperforming it in a spirit of selfless charity!—an act which is not possiblein self-abasement, only in self-exaltation, only in the confidence of beingdesired and being worthy of desire. It is an act that forces him to standnaked in spirit, as well as in body, and to accept his real ego as., hisstandard of value. He will always be attracted to the woman who reflects hisdeepest vision of himself, the woman whose surrender permits him toexperience—or to fake—a sense of self-esteem. The man who is proudly certainof his own value, will want the highest type of woman he can find, the womanhe admires, the strongest, the hardest to conquer—because only the possessionof a heroine will give him the sense of an achievement, not the possession of

a brainless slut. He does not seek to . . . What's the matter?" he asked,seeing the look on Rearden's face, a look of intensity much beyond mereinterest in an abstract discussion."Go on," said Rearden tensely.

"He does not seek to gain his value, he seeks to express it. There is noconflict between the standards of his mind and the desires of his body. Butthe man who is convinced of his own worthlessness will be drawn to a woman hedespises—because she will reflect his own secret self, she will release himfrom that objective reality in which he is a fraud, she will give him amomentary illusion of his own value and a momentary escape from the moralcode that damns him. Observe the ugly mess which most men make of their sexlives—and observe the mess of contradictions which they hold as their moralphilosophy. One proceeds from the other. Love is our response to our highestvalues—

and can be nothing else. Let a man corrupt his values and his view ofexistence, let him profess that love is not self-enjoyment but self-denial,that virtue consists, not of pride, but of pity or pain or weakness orsacrifice, that the noblest love is born, not of admiration, but of charity,not in response to values, but in response to flaws—and he will have cuthimself in two. His body will not obey him, it will not respond, it will makehim impotent toward the woman he professes to love and draw him to the lowesttype of whore he can find. His body will always follow the ultimate logic ofhis deepest convictions; if he believes that flaws are values, he has damnedexistence as evil and only the evil will attract him. He has damned himselfand he will feel that depravity is all he is worthy of enjoying. He hasequated virtue with pain and he will feel that vice is the only realm ofpleasure. Then he will scream that his body has vicious desires of its ownwhich his mind cannot conquer, that sex is sin, that true love is a pureemotion of the spirit. And then he will wonder why love brings him nothingbut boredom, and sex—nothing but shame."

Rearden said slowly, looking off, not realizing that he was thinkingaloud, "At least . . . I've never accepted that other tenet . . . I've neverfelt guilty about making money."

Francisco missed the significance of the first two words; he smiled andsaid eagerly, "You do see that it's the same issue? No, you'd never acceptany part of their vicious creed. You wouldn't be able to force it uponyourself. If you tried to damn sex as evil, you'd still find yourself,against your will, acting on the proper moral premise. You'd be attracted tothe highest woman you met. You'd always want a heroine. You'd be incapable ofself-contempt. You'd be unable to believe that existence is evil and thatyou're a helpless creature caught in an impossible universe. You're the manwho's spent his life shaping matter to the purpose of his mind. You're theman who would know that just as an idea unexpressed in physical action iscontemptible hypocrisy, so is platonic love—and just as physical actionunguided by an idea is a fool's self-fraud, so is sex when cut off from one'scode of values. It's the same issue, and you would know it. Your inviolatesense of self-esteem would know it. You would be incapable of desire for awoman you despised. Only the man who extols the purity of a love devoid ofdesire, is capable of the depravity of a desire devoid of love. But observethat most people are creatures cut in half who keep swinging desperately toone side or to the other. One kind of half is the man who despises money,factories, skyscrapers and his own body.

He holds undefined emotions about non-conceivable subjects as the meaningof life and as his claim to virtue. And he cries with despair, because he canfeel nothing for the women he respects, but finds himself in bondage to anirresistible passion for a slut from the gutter.

He is the man whom people call an idealist. The other kind of half is theman whom people call practical, the man who despises principles,abstractions, art, philosophy and his own mind. He regards the acquisition ofmaterial objects as the only goal of existence—and he laughs at the need toconsider their purpose or their source. He expects them to give him pleasure—and he wonders why the more he gets, the less he feels. He is the man whospends his time chasing women. Observe the triple fraud which he perpetratesupon himself. He will not acknowledge his need of self-esteem, since hescoffs at such a concept as moral values; yet he feels the profound self-contempt which comes from believing that he is a piece of meat. He will notacknowledge, but he knows that sex is the physical expression of a tribute topersonal values. So he tries, by going through the motions of the effect, toacquire that which should have been the cause. He tries to gain a sense ofhis own value from the women who surrender to him—and he forgets that thewomen he picks have neither character nor judgment nor standard of value. Hetells himself that all he's after is physical pleasure-but observe that he tires of his women in a week or a night, that hedespises professional whores and that he loves to imagine he is seducingvirtuous girls who make a great exception for his sake. It is the feeling, ofachievement that he seeks and never finds. What glory can there be in theconquest of a mindless body? Now that is your woman-chaser. Does thedescription fit me?""God, no!"

"Then you can judge, without asking my word for it, how much chasing ofwomen I've done in my life."

"But what on earth have you been doing on the front pages of newspapersfor the last—isn't it twelve—years?"

"I've spent a lot of money on the most ostentatiously vulgar parties Icould think of, and a miserable amount of time on being seen with theappropriate sort of women. As for the rest—" He stopped, then said, "I havesome friends who know this, but you are the first person to whom I amconfiding it against my own rules: I have never slept with any of thosewomen. I have never touched one of them."

"What is more incredible than that, is that I believe you."

The lamp on the floor beside him threw broken bits of light acrossFrancisco's face, as he leaned forward; the face had a look of guiltlessamusement. "If you care to glance over those front pages, you'll see thatI've never said anything. It was the women who were eager to rush into printwith stories insinuating that being seen with me at a restaurant was the signof a great romance. What do you suppose those women are after but the samething as the chaser—the desire to gain their own value from the number andfame of the men they conquer? Only it's one step phonier, because the valuethey seek is not even in the actual fact, but in the impression on and theenvy of other women. Well, I gave those bitches what they wanted—but whatthey literally wanted, without the pretense that they expected, the pretensethat hides from Them the nature of their wish. Do you think they wanted tosleep with me or with any man? They wouldn't be capable of so real and honesta desire. They wanted food for their vanity—and I gave it to them. I gavethem the chance to boast to their friends and to see themselves in thescandal sheets in the roles of great seductresses. But do you know that itworks in exactly the same way as what you did at your trial? If you want todefeat any kind of vicious fraud—comply with it literally, adding nothing ofyour own to disguise its nature. Those women understood. They saw whetherthere's any satisfaction in being envied by others for a feat one has notachieved. Instead of self-esteem, their publicized romances with me havegiven them a deeper sense of inferiority: each one of them knows that she'stried and failed. If dragging me into bed is supposed to be her public

standard of value, she knows that she couldn't live up to it. I think thosewomen hate me more than any other man on.

earth. But my secret is safe—because each one of them thinks that she wasthe only one who failed, while all the others succeeded, so she'll be themore vehement in swearing to our romance and will never admit the truth toanybody."

"But what have you done to your own reputation?"

Francisco shrugged. "Those whom I respect, will know the truth about me,sooner or later. The others"—his face hardened—"the others consider thatwhich I really am as evil. Let them have what they prefer—what I appear to beon the front pages."

"But what for? Why did you do it? Just to teach them a lesson?"

"Hell, no! I wanted to be known as a playboy."

"Why?"

"A playboy is a man who just can't help letting money run through hisfingers."

"Why did you want to assume such an ugly sort of role?""Camouflage.""For what?"

"For a purpose of my own.""What purpose?"

Francisco shook his head. "Don't ask me to tell you that. I've told youmore than I should. You'll come to know the rest of it soon, anyway.""If it's more than you should, why did you tell me?"

"Because . . . you've made me become impatient for the first time inyears." The note of a suppressed emotion came back into his voice.

"Because I've never wanted anyone to know the truth about me as I wantedyou to know it. Because I knew that you'd despise a playboy more than anyother sort of man—as I would, too. Playboy? I've never loved but one woman inmy life and still do and always will!" It was an involuntary break, and headded, his voice low, "I've never confessed that to anyone . . . not even toher. "

"Have you lost her?"

Francisco sat looking off into space; in a moment, he answered tonelessly,"I hope not."

The light of the lamp hit his face from below, and Rearden could not seehis eyes, only his mouth drawn in lines of endurance and oddly solemnresignation. Rearden knew that this was a wound not to be probed any further.

With one of his swift changes of mood, Francisco said, "Oh well, it's justa little longer!" and rose to his feet, smiling.

"Since you trust me," said Rearden, "I want to tell you a secret of minein exchange. I want you to, know how much I trusted you before I came here.And I might need your help later."

"You're the only man left whom I'd like to help."

"There's a great deal that I don't understand about you, but I'm certainof one thing: that you're not a friend of the looters."

"I'm not." There was a hint of amusement in Francisco's face, as at anunderstatement.

"So I know that you won't betray me if I tell you that I'm going tocontinue selling Rearden Metal to customers of my own choice in any amount Iwish, whenever I see a chance to do it. Right now, I'm getting ready to pouran order twenty times the size of the one they tried me for."

Sitting on the arm of a chair, a few feet away, Francisco leaned forwardto look at him silently, frowning, for a long moment, "Do you think thatyou're fighting them by doing it?" he asked.

"Well, what would you call it? Co-operating?"

"You were willing to work and produce Rearden Metal for them at the priceof losing your profits, losing your friends, enriching stray bastards who hadthe pull to rob you, and taking their abuse for the privilege of keeping themalive. Now you're willing to do it at the price of accepting the position ofa criminal and the risk of being thrown in jail at any moment—for the sake ofkeeping in existence a system which can be kept going only by its victims,only by the breaking of its own laws."

"It's not for their system, but for customers whom I can't abandon to themercy of their system—I intend to outlast that system of theirs —I don'tintend to let them stop me, no matter how hard they make it for me—and Idon't intend to give up the world to them, even if I am the last man left.Right now, that illegal order is more important to me than the whole of mymills."

Francisco shook his head slowly and did not answer; then he asked, "Towhich one of your friends in the copper industry are you going to give thevaluable privilege of informing on you this time?"

Rearden smiled. "Not this time. This time, I'm dealing with a man I cantrust. "

"Really? Who is it?"

"You. "

Francisco sat up straight. "What?" he asked, his voice so low that healmost succeeded in hiding the sound of a gasp.

Rearden was smiling. "You didn't know that I'm one of your customers now?It was done through a couple of stooges and under a phony name—but I'll needyour help to prevent anyone on your staff from becoming inquisitive about it.I need that copper, I need it on time—and I don't care if they arrest melater, so long as I get this through. I know that you've lost all concern foryour company, your wealth, your work, because you don't care to deal withlooters like Taggart and Boyle. But if you meant all the things you taughtme, if I am the last man left whom you respect, you'll help me to survive andto beat them. I've never asked for anyone's help. I'm asking for yours.

I need you. I trust you. You've always professed your admiration for me.Well, there's my life in your hands—if you want it. An order of d'Anconiacopper is being shipped to me right now. It left San Juan on December fifth."

"What?!"

It was a scream of plain shock. Francisco had shot to his feet, past anyattempt to hide anything. "On December fifth?""Yes," said Rearden, stupefied.

Francisco leaped to the telephone. "I told you not to deal with d'AnconiaCopper!" It was the half-moaning, half-furious cry of despair.

His hand was reaching for the telephone, but jerked back. He grasped theedge of the table, as if to stop himself from lifting the receiver, and hestood, head down, for how long a time neither he nor Rearden could tell.Rearden was held numb by the fact of watching an agonized struggle with themotionless figure of a man as its only evidence. He could not guess thenature of the struggle, he knew only that there was something which Franciscohad the power to prevent in that moment and that it was a power which hewould not use.

When Francisco raised his head, Rearden saw a face drawn by so great asuffering that its lines were almost an audible cry of pain, the moreterrible because the face had a look of firmness, as if the decision had beenmade and this was the price of it.

"Francisco . . . what's the matter?"

"Hank, I . . . " He shook his head, stopped, then stood up straight."Mr. Rearden," he said, in a voice that had the strength, the despair andthe peculiar dignity of a plea he knew to be hopeless, "for the time when

you're going to damn me, when you're going to doubt every word I said ... Iswear to you—by the woman I love—that I am your friend."

The memory of Francisco's face as it looked in that moment, came back toRearden three days later, through a blinding shock of loss and hatred—it cameback, even though, standing by the radio in his office, he thought that hemust now keep away from the Wayne-Falkland or he would kill Franciscod'Anconia on sight—it kept coming back to him, through the words he washearing—he was hearing that three ships of d'Anconia copper, bound from SanJuan to New York, had been attacked by Ragnar Danneskjold and sent to thebottom of the ocean—it kept coming back, even though he knew that much morethan the copper had gone down for him with those ships.

CHAPTER VACCOUNT OVERDRAWN

It was the first failure in the history of Rearden Steel. For the firsttime, an order was not delivered as promised. But by February 15, when theTaggart rail was due, it made no difference to anyone any longer.

Winter had come early, in the last days of November. People said that itwas the hardest winter on record and that no one could be blamed for theunusual severity of the snowstorms. They did not care to remember that therehad been a time when snowstorms did not sweep, unresisted, down unlightedroads and upon the roofs of unheated houses, did not stop the movement oftrains, did not leave a wake of corpses counted by the hundreds.

The first time that Danagger Coal was late in delivering fuel to TaggartTranscontinental, in the last week of December, Danagger's cousin explainedthat he could not help it; he had had to cut the workday down to six hours,he said, in order to raise the morale of the men who did not seem to functionas they had in the days of his cousin Kenneth; the men had become listlessand sloppy, he said, because they were exhausted by the harsh discipline ofthe former management; he could not help it if some of the superintendentsand foremen had quit him without reason, men who had been with the companyfor ten to twenty years; he could not help it if there seemed to be somefriction between his workers and his new supervisory staff, even though thenew men were much more liberal than the old slave drivers; it was only amatter of readjustment, he said. He could not help it, he said, if thetonnage intended for Taggart Transcontinental had been turned over, on theeve of its scheduled delivery, to the Bureau of Global Relief for shipment tothe People's State of England; it was an emergency, the people of Englandwere starving, with all of their State factories closing down—and MissTaggart was being unreasonable, since it was only a matter of one day'sdelay.

It was only one day's delay. It caused a three days' delay in the run ofFreight Train Number 386, bound from California to New York with fifty-ninecarloads of lettuce and oranges. Freight Train Number 386 waited on sidings,at coaling stations, for the fuel that had not arrived. When the trainreached New York, the lettuce and oranges had to be dumped into the EastRiver: they had waited their turn too long in the freight houses ofCalifornia, with the train schedules cut and the engines forbidden, bydirective, to pull a train of more than sixty cars.

Nobody but their friends and trade associates noticed that three orangegrowers in California went out of business, as well as two lettuce farmers inImperial Valley; nobody noticed the closing of a commission house in NewYork, of a plumbing company to which the commission house owed money, of alead-pipe wholesaler who had supplied the plumbing company. When people werestarving, said the newspapers, one did not have to feel concern over thefailures of business enterprises which were only private ventures for privateprofit.

The coal shipped across the Atlantic by the Bureau of Global Relief didnot reach the People's State of England: it was seized by Ragnar Danneskjold.

The second time that Danagger Coal was late in delivering fuel to TaggartTranscontinental, in mid-January, Danagger's cousin snarled over thetelephone that he could not help it: his mines had been shut down for threedays, due to a shortage of lubricating oil for the machinery. The supply ofcoal to Taggart Transcontinental was four days late.

Mr. Quinn, of the Quinn Ball Bearing Company which had once moved fromConnecticut to Colorado, waited a week for the freight train that carried his

order of Rearden steel. When the train arrived, the doors of the Quinn BallBearing Company's plant were closed.

Nobody traced the closing of a motor company in Michigan, that had waitedfor a shipment of ball bearings, its machinery idle, its workers on full pay;or the closing of a sawmill in Oregon, that had waited for a new motor; orthe closing of a lumber yard in Iowa, left without supply; or the bankruptcyof a building contractor in Illinois who, failing to get his lumber on time,found his contracts cancelled and the purchasers of his homes sent wanderingoff down snowswept roads in search of that which did not exist anywhere anylonger.

The snowstorm that came at the end of January blocked the passes throughthe Rocky Mountains, raising white walls thirty feet high across the main-line track of Taggart Transcontinental. The men who attempted to clear thetrack, gave up within the first few hours: the rotary plows broke down, oneafter another. The plows had been kept in precarious repair for two yearspast the span of their usefulness. The new plows had not been delivered; themanufacturer had quit, unable to obtain the steel he needed from Orren Boyle.

Three westbound trains were trapped on the sidings of Winston Station,high in the Rockies, where the main line of Taggart Transcontinental cutacross the northwest corner of Colorado. For five days, they remained beyondthe reach of help. Trains could not approach them through the storm. The lastof the trucks made by Lawrence Hammond broke down on the frozen grades of themountain highways.

The best of the airplanes once made by Dwight Sanders were sent out, butnever reached Winston Station; they were worn past the stage of fighting astorm.

Through the driving mesh of snow, the passengers trapped aboard the trainslooked out at the lights of Winston's shanties. The lights died in the nightof the second day. By the evening of the third, the lights, the heat and thefood had given out aboard the trains. In the brief lulls of the storm, whenthe white mesh vanished and left behind it the stillness of a black voidmerging a lightless earth with a starless sky—

the passengers could see, many miles away to the south, a small tongue offlame twisting in the wind. It was Wyatt's Torch.

By the morning of the sixth day, when the trains were able to move andproceeded down the slopes of Utah, of Nevada, of California, the trainmenobserved the smokeless stacks and the closed doors of small tracksidefactories, which had not been closed on their last run.

"Storms are an act of God," wrote Bertram Scudder, "and nobody can be heldsocially responsible for the weather."

The rations of coal, established by Wesley Mouch, permitted the heating ofhomes for three hours a day. There was no wood to burn, no metal to make newstoves, no tools to pierce the walls of the houses for new installations. Inmakeshift contraptions of bricks and oil cans, professors were burning thebooks of their libraries, and fruit growers were burning the trees of theirorchards. "Privations strengthen a people's spirit," wrote Bertram Scudder,"and forge the fine steel of social discipline. Sacrifice is the cement whichunites human bricks into the great edifice of society."

"The nation which had once held the creed that greatness is achieved byproduction, is now told that it is achieved by squalor," said Franciscod'Anconia in a press interview. But this was not printed.

The only business boom, that winter, came to the amusement industry.People wrenched their pennies out of the quicksands of their food and heatbudgets, and went without meals in order to crowd into movie theaters, inorder to escape for a few hours the state of animals reduced to the singleconcern of terror over their crudest needs. In January, all movie theaters,night clubs and bowling alleys were closed by order of Wesley Mouch, for the

purpose of conserving fuel. "Pleasure is not an essential of existence,"wrote Bertram Scudder.

"You must learn to take a philosophical attitude," said Dr. SimonPritchett to a young girl student who broke down into sudden, hysterical sobsin the middle of a lecture. She had just returned from a volunteer reliefexpedition to a settlement on Lake Superior; she had seen a mother holdingthe body of a grown son who had died of hunger.

"There are no absolutes," said Dr. Pritchett. "Reality is only anillusion.

How does that woman know that her son is dead? How does she know that heever existed?"

People with pleading eyes and desperate faces crowded into tents whereevangelists cried in triumphant gloating that man was unable to cope withnature, that his science was a fraud, that his mind was a failure, that hewas reaping punishment for the sin of pride, for his confidence in his ownintellect—and that only faith in the power of mystic secrets could protecthim from the fissure of a rail or from the blowout of the last tire on hislast truck. Love was the key to the mystic secrets, they cried, love andselfless sacrifice to the needs of others.

Orren Boyle made a selfless sacrifice to the needs of others. He sold tothe Bureau of Global Relief, for shipment to the People's State of Germany,ten thousand tons of structural steel shapes that had been intended for theAtlantic Southern Railroad. "It was a difficult decision to make," he said,with a moist, unfocused look of righteousness, to the panic-strickenpresident of the Atlantic Southern, "but I weighed the fact that you're arich corporation, while the people of Germany are in a state of unspeakablemisery. So I acted on the principle that need comes first. When in doubt,it's the weak that must be considered, not the strong." The president of theAtlantic Southern had heard that Orren Boyle's most valuable friend inWashington had a friend in the Ministry of Supply of the People's State ofGermany. But whether this had been Boyle's motive or whether it had been theprinciple of sacrifice, no one could tell and it made no difference: if Boylehad been a saint of the creed of selflessness, he would have had to doprecisely what he had done. This silenced the president of the AtlanticSouthern; he dared not admit that he cared for his railroad more than for thepeople of Germany; he dared not argue against the principle of sacrifice.

The waters of the Mississippi had been rising all through the month ofJanuary, swollen by the storms, driven by the wind into a restless grindingof current against current and against every obstruction in their way. On anight of lashing sleet, in the first week of February, the Mississippi bridgeof the Atlantic Southern collapsed under a passenger train. The engine andthe first five sleepers went down with the cracking girders into the twistingblack spirals of water eighty feet below. The rest of the train remained onthe first three spans of the bridge, which held.

"You can't have your cake and let your neighbor eat it, too," saidFrancisco d'Anconia. The fury of denunciations which the holders of publicvoices unleashed against him was greater than their concern over the horrorat the river.

It was whispered that the chief engineer of the Atlantic Southern, indespair over the company's failure to obtain the steel he needed to reinforcethe bridge, had resigned six months ago, telling the company that the bridgewas unsafe. He had written a letter to the largest newspaper in New York,warning the public about it; the letter had not been printed. It waswhispered that the first three spans of the bridge had held because they hadbeen reinforced with structural shapes of Rearden Metal; but five hundredtons of the Metal was all that the railroad had been able to obtain under theFair Share Law.

As the sole result of official investigations, two bridges across theMississippi, belonging to smaller railroads, were condemned. One of therailroads went out of business; the other closed a branch line, tore up itsrail and laid a track to the Mississippi bridge of Taggart Transcontinental;so did the Atlantic Southern.

The great Taggart Bridge at Bedford, Illinois, had been built by NathanielTaggart. He had fought the government for years, because the courts hadruled, on the complaint of river shippers, that railroads were a destructivecompetition to shipping and thus a threat to the public welfare, and thatrailroad bridges across the Mississippi were to be forbidden as a materialobstruction; the courts had ordered Nathaniel Taggart to tear down his bridgeand to carry his passengers across the river by means of barges. He had wonthat battle by a majority of one voice on the Supreme Court. His bridge wasnow the only major link left to hold the continent together. His lastdescendant had made it her strictest rule that whatever else was neglected,the Taggart Bridge would always be maintained in flawless shape.

The steel shipped across the Atlantic by the Bureau of Global Relief hadnot reached the People's State of Germany. It had been seized by RagnarDanneskjold—but nobody heard of it outside the Bureau, because the newspapershad long since stopped mentioning the activities of Ragnar Danneskjold.

It was not until the public began to notice the growing shortage, then thedisappearance from the market of electric irons, toasters, washing machinesand all electrical appliances, that people began to ask questions and to hearwhispers. They heard that no ship loaded with d'Anconia copper was able toreach a port of the United States; it could not get past Ragnar Danneskjold.

In the foggy winter nights, on the waterfront, sailors whispered the storythat Ragnar Danneskjold always seized the cargoes of relief vessels, butnever touched the copper: he sank the d'Anconia ships with their loads; helet the crews escape in lifeboats, but the copper went to the bottom of theocean. They whispered it as a dark legend beyond men's power to explain;nobody could find a reason why Danneskjold did not choose to take the copper.

In the second week of February, for the purpose of conserving copper wireand electric power, a directive forbade the running of elevators above thetwenty-fifth floor. The upper floors of the buildings had to be vacated, andpartitions of unpainted boards went up to cut off the stairways. By specialpermit, exceptions were granted—on the grounds of "essential need"—to a fewof the larger business enterprises and the more fashionable hotels. The topsof the cities were cut down.

The inhabitants of New York had never had to be aware of the weather.Storms had been only a nuisance that slowed the traffic and made puddles inthe doorways of brightly lighted shops. Stepping against the wind, dressed inraincoats, furs and evening slippers, people had felt that a storm was anintruder within the city. Now, facing the gusts of snow that came sweepingdown the narrow streets, people felt in dim terror that they were thetemporary intruders and that the wind had the right-of-way.

"It won't make any difference to us now, forget it, Hank, it doesn'tmatter," said Dagny when Rearden told her that he would not be able todeliver the rail; he had not been able to find a supplier of copper.

"Forget it, Hank." He did not answer her. He could not forget the firstfailure of Rearden Steel.

On the evening of February 15, a plate cracked on a rail joint and sent anengine off the track, half a mile from Winston, Colorado, on a division whichwas to have been relaid with the new rail. The station agent of Winstonsighed and sent for a crew with a crane; it was only one of the minoraccidents that were happening in his section every other day or so, he wasgetting used to it.

Rearden, that evening, his coat collar raised, his hat slanted low overhis eyes, the snow drifts rising to his knees, was tramping through anabandoned open-pit coal mine, in a forsaken corner of Pennsylvania,supervising the loading of pirated coal upon the trucks which he hadprovided. Nobody owned the mine, nobody could afford the cost of working it.But a young man with a brusque voice and dark, angry eyes, who came from astarving settlement, had organized a gang of the unemployed and made a dealwith Rearden to deliver the coal.

They mined it at night, they stored it in hidden culverts, they were paidin cash, with no questions asked or answered. Guilty of a fierce desire toremain alive, they and Rearden traded like savages, without rights, titles,contracts or protection, with nothing but mutual understanding and aruthlessly absolute observance of one's given word. Rearden did not even knowthe name of the young leader. Watching him at the job of loading the trucks,Rearden thought that this boy, if born a generation earlier, would havebecome a great industrialist; now, he would probably end his brief life as aplain criminal in a few more years.

Dagny, that evening, was facing a meeting of the Taggart Board ofDirectors.

They sat about a polished table in a stately Board room which wasinadequately heated. The men who, through the decades of their careers, hadrelied for their security upon keeping their faces blank, their wordsinconclusive and their clothes impeccable, were thrown off-key by thesweaters stretched over their stomachs, by the mufflers wound about theirnecks, by the sound of coughing that cut through the discussion toofrequently, like the rattle of a machine gun.

She noted that Jim had lost the smoothness of his usual performance.

He sat with his head drawn into his shoulders, and his eyes kept dartingtoo rapidly from face to face.

A man from Washington sat at the table among them. Nobody knew his exactjob or title, but it was not necessary: they knew that he was the man fromWashington. His name was Mr. Weatherby, he had graying temples, a long,narrow face and a mouth that looked as if he had to stretch his facialmuscles in order to keep it closed; this gave a suggestion of primness to aface that displayed nothing else. The Directors did not know whether he waspresent as the guest, the adviser or the ruler of the Board; they preferrednot to find out.

"It seems to me," said the chairman, "that the top problem for us toconsider is the fact that the track of our main line appears to be in adeplorable, not to say critical, condition—" He paused, then addedcautiously, "—while the only good rail we own is that of the John Gait—Imean, the Rio Norte—Line."

In the same cautious tone of waiting for someone else to pick up theintended purpose of his words, another man said, "If we consider our criticalshortage of equipment, and if we consider that we are letting it wear out inthe service of a branch line running at a loss—" He stopped and did not statewhat would occur if they considered it.

"In my opinion," said a thin, pallid man with a neat mustache, "the RioNorte Line seems to have become a financial burden which the company mightnot be able to carry—that is, not unless certain readjustments are made,which—" He did not finish, but glanced at Mr.

Weatherby. Mr. Weatherby looked as if he had not noticed it.

"Jim," said the chairman, "I think you might explain the picture to Mr.Weatherby."

Taggart's voice still retained a practiced smoothness, but it was thesmoothness of a piece of cloth stretched tight over a broken glass object,and the sharp edges showed through once in a while: "I think it is generally

conceded that the main factor affecting every railroad in the country is theunusual rate of business failures. While we all realize, of course, that thisis only temporary, still, for the moment, it has made the railroad situationapproach a stage that may well be described as desperate. Specifically, thenumber of factories which have closed throughout the territory of the TaggartTranscontinental system is so large that it has wrecked our entire financialstructure. Districts and divisions which had always brought us our steadiestrevenues, are now showing an actual operating loss. A train schedule gearedto a heavy volume of freight cannot be maintained for three shippers wherethere had once been seven. We cannot give them the same service—at least, notat . . . our present rates." He glanced at Mr. Weatherby, but Mr.

Weatherby did not seem to notice. "It seems to me," said Taggart, thesharp edges becoming sharper in his voice, "that the stand taken by ourshippers is unfair. Most of them have been complaining about theircompetitors and have passed various local measures to eliminate competitionin their particular fields. Now most of them are practically in solepossession of their markets, yet they refuse to realize that a railroadcannot give to one lone factory the freight rates which had been madepossible by the production of a whole region. We are running our trains forthem at a loss, yet they have taken a stand against any . . . raise inrates."

"Against any raise?" said Mr. Weatherby mildly, with a good imitation ofastonishment. "That is not the stand they have taken."

"If certain rumors, which I refuse to credit, are true—" said thechairman, and stopped one syllable after the tone of panic had become obviousin his voice.

"Jim," said Mr. Weatherby pleasantly, "I think it would be best if we justdidn't mention the subject of raising the rates."

"I wasn't suggesting an actual raise at this time," said Taggart hastily."I merely referred to it to round out the picture."

"But, Jim," said an old man with a quavering voice, "I thought that yourinfluence—I mean, your friendship—with Mr. Mouch would insure ..."

He stopped, because the others were looking at him severely, in reprooffor the breach of an unwritten law: one did not mention a failure of thiskind, one did not discuss the mysterious ways of Jim's powerful friendshipsor why they had failed him.

"Fact is," said Mr. Weatherby easily, "that Mr. Mouch sent me here todiscuss the demand of the railway unions for a raise in wages and the demandof the shippers for a cut in rates."

He said it in a tone of casual firmness; he knew that all these men hadknown it, that the demands had been discussed in the newspapers for months;he knew that the dread in these men's minds was not of the fact, but of hisnaming it—as if the fact had not existed, but his words held the power tomake it exist; he knew that they had waited to see whether he would exercisethat power; he was letting them know that he would.

Their situation warranted an outcry of protest; there was none; nobodyanswered him. Then James Taggart said in that biting, nervous tone which isintended to convey anger, but merely confesses uncertainty, "I wouldn'texaggerate the importance of Buzzy Watts of the National Shippers Council.He's been making a lot of noise and giving a lot of expensive dinners inWashington, but I wouldn't advise taking it too seriously."

"Oh, I don't know," said Mr. Weatherby.

"Listen, Clem, I do know that Wesley refused to see him last week.""That's true. Wesley is a pretty busy man."

"And I know that when Gene Lawson gave that big party ten days ago,practically everybody was there, but Buzzy Watts was not invited.""That's so," said Mr. Weatherby peaceably.

"So I wouldn't bet on Mr. Buzzy Watts, Clem. And I wouldn't let it worryme. "

"Wesley's an impartial man," said Mr. Weatherby. "A man devoted to publicduty. It's the interests of the country as a whole that he's got to considerabove everything else." Taggart sat up; of all the danger signs he knew, thisline of talk was the worst. "Nobody can deny it, Jim, that Wesley feels ahigh regard for you as an enlightened businessman, a valuable adviser and oneof his closest personal friends."

Taggart's eyes shot to him swiftly: this was still worse. "But nobody cansay that Wesley would hesitate to sacrifice his personal feelings andfriendships—where the welfare of the public is concerned."

Taggart's face remained blank; his terror came from things never allowedto reach expression in words or in facial muscles. The terror was hisstruggle against an unadmitted thought: he himself had been "the public" forso long and in so many different issues, that he knew what it would mean ifthat magic title, that sacred title no one dared to oppose, were transferred,along with its "welfare," to the person of Buzzy Watts.

But what he asked, and he asked it hastily, was, "You're not implying thatI would place my personal interests above the public welfare, are you?"

"No, of course not," said Mr. Weatherby, with a look that was almost asmile. "Certainly not. Not you, Jim. Your public-spirited attitude—andunderstanding—are too well known. That's why Wesley expects you to see everyside of the picture."

"Yes, of course," said Taggart, trapped.

"Well, consider the unions' side of it. Maybe you can't afford to givethem a raise, but how can they afford to exist when the cost of living hasshot sky-high? They've got to eat, don't they? That comes first, railroad orno railroad." Mr. Weatherby's tone had a kind of placid righteousness, as ifhe were reciting a formula required to convey another meaning, clear to allof them; he was looking straight at Taggart, in special emphasis of theunstated. "There are almost a million members in the railway unions. Withfamilies, dependents and poor relatives—and who hasn't got poor relativesthese days?—it amounts to about five million votes. Persons, I mean. Wesleyhas to bear that in mind. He has to think of their psychology. And then,consider the public. The rates you're charging were established at a timewhen everybody was making money. But the way things are now, the cost oftransportation has become a burden nobody can afford. People arc screamingabout it all over the country." He looked straight at Taggart; he merelylooked, but his glance had the quality of a wink.

"There's an awful lot of them, Jim. They're not very happy at the momentabout an awful lot of things. A government that would bring the railroadrates down would make a lot of folks grateful."

The silence that answered him was like a hole so deep that no sound couldbe heard of the things crashing down to its bottom. Taggart knew, as they allknew, to what disinterested motive Mr. Mouch would always be ready tosacrifice his personal friendships.

It was the silence and the fact that she did not want to say it, had comehere resolved not to speak, but could not resist it, that made Dagny's voicesound so vibrantly harsh: "Got what you've been asking for, all these years,gentlemen?"

The swiftness with which their eyes moved to her was an involuntary answerto an unexpected sound, but the swiftness with which they moved away—to lookdown at the table, at the walls, anywhere but at her—was the conscious answerto the meaning of the sounds.

In the silence of the next moment, she felt their resentment like a starchthickening the air of the room, and she knew that it was not resentmentagainst Mr. Weatherby, but against her. She could have borne it, if they had

merely let her question go unanswered; but what made her feel a sickeningtightness in her stomach, was their double fraud of pretending to ignore herand then answering in their own kind of manner.

The chairman said, not looking at her, his voice pointedly noncommittal,yet vaguely purposeful at the same time, "It would have been all right,everything would have worked out fine, if it weren't for the wrong people inpositions of power, such as Buzzy Watts and Chick Morrison."

"Oh, I wouldn't worry about Chick Morrison," said the pallid man with themustache. "He hasn't any top-level connections. Not really.

It's Tinky Holloway that's poison."

"I don't see the picture as hopeless," said a portly man who wore a greenmuffler. "Joe Dunphy and Bud Hazleton are very close to Wesley. If theirinfluence prevails, we'll be all right. However, Kip Chalmers and TinkyHolloway are dangerous."

"I can take care of Kip Chalmers," said Taggart.

Mr. Weatherby was the only person in the room who did not mind looking atDagny; but whenever his glance rested upon her, it registered nothing; shewas the only person in the room whom he did not see.

"I am thinking," said Mr. Weatherby casually, looking at Taggart, "thatyou might do Wesley a favor."

"Wesley knows that he can always count on me."

"Well, my thought is that if you granted the unions' wage raises—

we might drop the question of cutting the rates, for the time being."

"I can't do that!" It was almost a cry. "The National Alliance ofRailroads has taken a unanimous stand against the raises and has committedevery member to refuse."

"That's just what I mean," said Mr. Weatherby softly. "Wesley needs todrive a wedge into that Alliance stand. If a railroad like TaggartTranscontinental were to give in, the rest would be easy. You would helpWesley a great deal. He would appreciate it."

"But, good God, Clem!—I'd be open to court action for it, by the Alliancerules!"

Mr. Weatherby smiled. "What court? Let Wesley take care of that.""But listen, Clem, you know—you know just as well as I do—that we can'tafford it!"

Mr. Weatherby shrugged. "That's a problem for you to work out.""How, for Christ's sake?"

"I don't know. That's your job, not ours. You wouldn't want the governmentto start telling you how to run your railroad, would you?""No, of course not! But—"

"Our job is only to see that the people get fair wages and decenttransportation. It's up to you to deliver. But, of course, if you say thatyou can't do the job, why then—"

"I haven't said it!" Taggart cried hastily, "I haven't said it at all!"

"Good," said Mr. Weatherby pleasantly. "We know that you have the abilityto find some way to do it."

He was looking at Taggart; Taggart was looking at Dagny.

"Well, it was just a thought," said Mr. Weatherby, leaning back in hischair in a manner of modest withdrawal. "Just a thought for you to mull over.I'm only a guest here. I don't want to interfere. The purpose of the meetingwas to discuss the situation of the . . . branch lines, I believe?"

"Yes," said the chairman and sighed. "Yes. Now if anyone has aconstructive suggestion to offer—" He waited; no one answered. "I believe thepicture is clear to all of us." He waited. "It seems to be established thatwe cannot continue to afford the operation of some of our branch lines . . .the Rio Norte Line in particular . . . and, therefore, some form of actionseems to be indicated. ..."

"I think, " said the pallid man with the mustache, his voice unexpectedlyconfident, "that we should now hear from Miss Taggart." He leaned forwardwith a look of hopeful craftiness. As Dagny did not answer, but merely turnedto him, he asked, "What do you have to say, Miss Taggart?"

"Nothing."

"I beg your pardon?"

"All I had to say was contained in the report which Jim has read to you."She spoke quietly, her voice clear and flat."But you did not make any recommendations.""I have none to make."

"But, after all, as our Operating Vice-President, you have a vitalinterest in the policies of this railroad."

"I have no authority over the policies of this railroad.""Oh, but we are anxious to consider your opinion.""I have no opinions."

"Miss Taggart," he said, in the smoothly formal tone of an order, "youcannot fail to realize that our branch lines are running at a disastrousdeficit—and that we expect you to make them pay."

"How?"

"I don't know. That is your job, not ours."

"I have stated in my report the reasons why that is now impossible.

If there are facts which I have overlooked, please name them."

"Oh, I wouldn't know. We expect you to find some way to make it possible.Our job is only to see that the stockholders get a fair profit.

It's up to you to deliver. You wouldn't want us to think that you'reunable to do the job and—"

"I am unable to do it."

The man opened his mouth, but found nothing else to say; he looked at herin bewilderment, wondering why the formula had failed.

"Miss Taggart," asked the man with the green muffler, "did you imply inyour report that the situation of the Rio Norte Line was critical?"

"I stated that it was hopeless."

"Then what action do you propose?"

"I propose- nothing."

"Aren't you evading a responsibility?"

"What is it that you think you're doing?" She spoke evenly, addressingthem all. "Are you counting on my not saying that the responsibility-isyours, that it was your goddamn policies that brought us where we are? Well,I'm saying it."

"Miss Taggart, Miss Taggart, " said the chairman in a tone of pleadingreproach, "there shouldn't be any hard feelings among us. Does it matter nowwho was to blame? We don't want to quarrel over past mistakes. We must allpull together as a team to carry our railroad through this desperateemergency,"

A gray-haired man of patrician bearing, who had remained silent throughoutthe session, with a look of the quietly bitter knowledge that the entireperformance was futile, glanced at Dagny in a way which would have beensympathy had he still felt a remnant of hope. He said, raising his voice justenough to betray a note of controlled indignation, "Mr. Chairman, if it ispractical solutions that we are considering, I should like to suggest that wediscuss the limitation placed upon the length and speed of our trains. Of anysingle practice, that is the most disastrous one. Its repeal would not solveall of our problems, but it would be an enormous relief. With the desperateshortage of motive power and the appalling shortage of fuel, it is criminalinsanity to send an engine out on the road with sixty cars when it could pulla hundred and to take four days on a run which could be made in three. Isuggest that we compute the number of shippers we have ruined and the

districts we have destroyed through the failures, shortages and delays oftransportation, and then we—"

"Don't think of it," Mr. Weatherby cut in snappily. "Don't try dreamingabout any repeals. We wouldn't consider it. We wouldn't even considerlistening to any talk on the subject."

"Mr. Chairman," the gray-haired man asked quietly, "shall I continue?"

The chairman spread out his hands, with a smooth smile, indicatinghelplessness. "It would be impractical," he answered.

"I think we'd better confine the discussion to the status of the Rio NorteLine," snapped James Taggart.

There was a long silence.

The man with the green muffler turned to Dagny. "Miss Taggart," he askedsadly and cautiously, "would you say that if—this is just a hypotheticalquestion—if the equipment now in use on the Rio Norte Line were madeavailable, it would fill the needs of our transcontinental main-linetraffic?"

"It would help."

"The rail of the Rio Norte Line," said the pallid man with the mustache,"is unmatched anywhere in the country and could not now be purchased at anyprice. We have three hundred miles of track, which means well over fourhundred miles of rail of pure Rearden Metal in that Line. Would you say, MissTaggart, that we cannot afford to waste that superlative rail on a branchthat carries no major traffic any longer?"

"That is for you to judge."

"Let me put it this way: would it be of value if that rail were madeavailable for our main-line track, which is in such urgent need of repair?""It would help."

"Miss Taggart, " asked the man with the quavering voice, "would you saythat there are any shippers of consequence left on the Rio Norte Line?""There's Ted Nielsen of Nielsen Motors. No one else."

"Would you say that the operating costs of the Rio Norte Line could beused to relieve the financial strain on the rest of the system?""It would help."

"Then, as our Operating Vice-President . . ."He stopped; she waited,looking at him; he said, "Well?""What was your question?"

"I meant to say . . . that is, well, as our Operating Vice-President,don't you have certain conclusions to draw?"

She stood up. She looked at the faces around the table. "Gentlemen,"she said, "I do not know by what sort of self-fraud you expect to feelthat if it's I who name the decision you intend to make, it will be I who'llbear the responsibility for it. Perhaps you believe that if my voice deliversthe final blow, it will make me the murderer involved—since you know thatthis is the last act of a long-drawn-out murder. I cannot conceive what it isyou think you can accomplish by a pretense of this kind, and I will not helpyou to stage it. The final blow will be delivered by you, as were all theothers."

She turned to go. The chairman half-rose, asking helplessly, "But, MissTaggart-"

"Please remain seated. Please continue the discussion—and take the vote inwhich I shall have no voice. I shall abstain from voting. Ill stand by, ifyou wish me to, but only as an employee. I will not pretend to be anythingelse. "

She turned away once more, but it was the voice of the gray-haired manthat stopped her. "Miss Taggart, this is not an official question, it is onlymy personal curiosity, but would you tell me your view of the future of theTaggart Transcontinental system?"

She answered, looking at him in understanding, her voice gentler, "I havestopped thinking of a future or of a railroad system. I intend to continuerunning trains so long as it is still possible to run them. I don't thinkthat it will be much longer."

She walked away from the table, to the window, to stand aside and let themcontinue without her.

She looked at the city. Jim had obtained the permit which allowed them theuse of electric power to the top of the Taggart Building.

From the height of the room, the city looked like a flattened remnant,with but a few rare, lonely streaks of lighted glass still rising through thedarkness to the sky.

She did not listen to the voices of the men behind her. She did not knowfor how long the broken snatches of their struggle kept rolling past her—thesounds that nudged and prodded one another, trying to edge back and leavesomeone pushed forward—a struggle, not to assert one's own will, but tosqueeze an assertion from some unwilling victim —a battle in which thedecision was to be pronounced, not by the winner, but by the loser: "It seemsto me ... It is, I think ... It must, in my opinion . . .

If we were to suppose ... I am merely suggesting ... I am notimplying, but ... If we consider both sides ... It is, in my opinion,indubitable ... It seems to me to be an unmistakable fact . . ."

She did not know whose voice it was, but she heard it when the voicepronounced: ". . . and, therefore, I move that the John Gait Line be closed."

Something, she thought, had made him call the Line by its right name.

You had to bear it, too, generations ago—it was just as hard for you, justas bad, but you did not let it stop you—was it really as bad as this? asugly?—never mind, it's different forms, but it's only pain, and you were notstopped by pain, not by whatever kind it was that you had to bear—you werenot stopped—you did not give in to it—you faced it and this is the kind Ihave to face—you fought and I will have to —you did it—I will try . . . Sheheard, in her own mind, the quiet intensity of the words of dedication—and itwas some time before she realized that she was speaking to Nat Taggart.

The next voice she heard was Mr. Weatherby's: "Wait a minute, boys.

Do you happen to remember that you need to obtain permission before youcan close a branch line?"

"Good God, Clem!" Taggart's cry was open panic. "Surely there's not goingto be any trouble about—"

"I wouldn't be too sure of it. Don't forget that you're a public serviceand you're expected to provide transportation, whether you make money ornot. "

"But you know that it's impossible!"

"Well, that's fine for you, that solves your problem, if you close thatLine—but what will it do to us? Leaving a whole state like Coloradopractically without transportation—what sort of public sentiment will itarouse? Now, of course, if you gave Wesley something in return, to balanceit, if you granted the unions' wage raises—"

"I can't! I gave my word to the National Alliance!"

"Your word? Well, suit yourself; We wouldn't want to force the Alliance.We much prefer to have things happen voluntarily. But these are difficulttimes and it's hard telling what's liable to happen. With everybody goingbroke and the tax receipts falling, we might—fact being that we hold wellover fifty per cent of the Taggart bonds—we might be compelled to call forthe payment of railroad bonds within six months."

"What?!" screamed Taggart.

"—or sooner."

"But you can't! Oh God, you can't! It was understood that the moratoriumwas for five years! It was a contract, an obligation! We were counting onit! "

"An obligation? Aren't you old-fashioned, Jim? There aren't anyobligations, except the necessity of the moment. The original owners of thosebonds were counting on their payments, too."

Dagny burst out laughing.

She could not stop herself, she could not resist it, she could not rejecta moment's chance to avenge Ellis Wyatt, Andrew Stockton, Lawrence Hammond,all the others. She said, torn by laughter: "Thanks, Mr. Weatherby!"

Mr. Weatherby looked at her in astonishment. "Yes?" he asked coldly.

"I knew that we would have to pay for those bonds one way or another.We 're paying."

"Miss Taggart, " said the chairman severely, "don't you think that I told-you-so's are futile? To talk of what would have happened if we had acteddifferently is nothing but purely theoretical speculation. We cannot indulgein theory, we have to deal with the practical reality of the moment."

"Right," said Mr. Weatherby. "That's what you ought to be—practical. Nowwe offer you a trade. You do something for us and we'll do something for you.You give the unions their wage raises and we'll give you permission to closethe Rio Norte Line."

"All right," said James Taggart, his voice choked.

Standing at the window, she heard them vote on their decision. She heardthem declare that the John Gait Line would end in six weeks, on March 31.

It's only a matter of getting through the next few moments, she thought;take care of the next few moments, and then the next, a few at a time, andafter a while it will be easier; you'll get over it, after a while.

The assignment she gave herself for the next few moments was to put on hercoat and be first to leave the room.

Then there was the assignment of riding in an elevator down the great,silent length of the Taggart Building. Then there was the assignment ofcrossing the dark lobby.

Halfway through the lobby, she stopped. A man stood leaning against thewall, in a manner of purposeful waiting—and it was she who was his purpose,because he was looking straight at her. She did not recognize him at once,because she felt certain that the face she saw could not possibly be there inthat lobby at this hour.

"Hi, Slug," he said softly.

She answered, groping for some great distance that had once been hers,"Hi, Frisco."

"Have they finally murdered John Gait?"

She struggled to place the moment into some orderly sequence of time. Thequestion belonged to the present, but the solemn face came from those days onthe hill by the Hudson when he would have understood all that the questionmeant to her.

"How did you know that they'd do it tonight?" she asked.

"It's been obvious for months that that would be the next step at theirnext meeting."

"Why did you come here?""To see how you'd take it.""Want to laugh about it?"

"No, Dagny, I don't want to laugh about it."

She saw no hint of amusement in his face; she answered trustingly, "Idon't know how I'm taking it.""I do."

"I was expecting it, I knew they'd have to do it, so now it's only amatter of getting through"—tonight, she wanted to say, but said—"all the workand details."

He took her arm. "Let's go some place where we can have a drink together.""Francisco, why don't you laugh at me? You've always laughed about thatLine."

"I will—tomorrow, when I see you going on with all the work and details.Not tonight.""Why not?"

"Come on. You're in no condition to talk about it."

"I—" She wanted to protest, but said, "No, I guess I'm not."

He led her out to the street, and she found herself walking silently intime with the steady rhythm of his steps, the grasp of his fingers on her armunstressed and firm. He signaled a passing taxicab and held the door open forher. She obeyed him without questions; she felt relief, like a swimmer whostops struggling. The spectacle of a man acting with assurance, was a lifebelt thrown to her at a moment when she had forgotten the hope of itsexistence. The relief was not in the surrender of responsibility, but in thesight of a man able to assume it.

"Dagny," he said, looking at the city as it moved past their taxi window,"think of the first man who thought of making a steel girder. He knew what hesaw, what he thought and what he wanted. He did not say, 'It seems to me,'and he did not take orders from those who say, 'In my opinion.'"

She chuckled, wondering at his accuracy: he had guessed the nature of thesickening sense that held her, the sense of a swamp which she had to escape.

"Look around you," he said. "A city is the frozen shape of human courage—the courage of those men who thought for the first time of every bolt, rivetand power generator that went to make it. The courage to say, not 'It seemsto me,' but 'It is'—and to stake one's life on one's judgment. You're notalone. Those men exist. They have always existed. There was a time when humanbeings crouched in caves, at the mercy of any pestilence and any storm. Couldmen such as those on your Board of Directors have brought them out of thecave and up to this?" He pointed at the city.

"God, no!"

"Then there's your proof that another kind of men do exist.""Yes," she said avidly. "Yes."

"Think of them and forget your Board of Directors."

"Francisco, where are they now—the other kind of men?"

"Now they're not wanted."

"I want them. Oh God, how I want them!"

"When you do, you'll find them."

He did not question her about the John Gait Line and she did not speak ofit, until they sat at a table in a dimly lighted booth and she saw the stemof a glass between her fingers. She had barely noticed how they had comehere. It was a quiet, costly place that looked like a secret retreat; she sawa small, lustrous table under her hand, the leather of a circular seat behindher shoulders, and a niche of dark blue mirror that cut them off from thesight of whatever enjoyment or pain others had come here to hide. Franciscowas leaning against the table, watching her, and she felt as if she wereleaning against the steady attentiveness of his eyes.

They did not speak of the Line, but she said suddenly, looking down at theliquid in her glass: "I'm thinking of the night when Nat Taggart was toldthat he had to abandon the bridge he was building. The bridge across theMississippi. He had been desperately short of money—because people wereafraid of the bridge, they called it an impractical venture. That morning, hewas told that the river steamboat concerns had filed suit against him,demanding that his bridge be destroyed as a threat to the public welfare.

There were three spans of the bridge built, advancing across the river. Thatsame day, a local mob attacked the structure and set fire to the woodenscaffolding. His workers deserted him, some because they were scared, somebecause they were bribed by the steamboat people, and most of them because hehad had no money to pay them for weeks. Throughout that day, he keptreceiving word that men who had subscribed to buy the stock of the TaggartTranscontinental Railroad were cancelling their subscriptions, one afteranother. Toward evening, a committee, representing two banks that were hislast hope of support, came to see him. It was right there, on theconstruction site by the river, in the old railway coach where he lived, withthe door open to the view of the blackened ruin, with the wooden remnantsstill smoking over the twisted steel. He had negotiated a loan from thosebanks, but the contract had not been signed. The committee told him that hewould have to give up his bridge, because he was certain to lose the suit,and the bridge would be ordered torn down by the time he completed it. If hewas willing to give it up, they said, and to ferry his passengers across theriver on barges, as other railroads were doing, the contract would stand andhe would get the money to continue his line west on the other shore; if not,then the loan was off. What was his answer?—

they asked. He did not say a word, he picked up the contract, tore itacross, handed it to them and walked out. He walked to the bridge, along thespans, down to the last girder. He knelt, he picked up the tools his men hadleft and he started to clear the charred wreckage away from the steelstructure. His chief engineer saw him there, axe in hand, alone over the wideriver, with the sun setting behind him in that west where his line was to go.He worked there all night. By morning, he had thought out a plan of what hewould do to find the right men, the men of independent judgment—to find them,to convince them, to raise the money, to continue the bridge."

She spoke in a low, flat voice, looking down at the spot of light thatshimmered in the liquid as her fingers turned the stem of her glass once in awhile. She showed no emotion, but her voice had the intense monotone of aprayer: "Francisco . . . if he could live through that night, what right haveI to complain? What does it matter, how I feel just now? He built thatbridge, I have to hold it for him. I can't let it go the way of the bridge ofthe Atlantic Southern. I feel almost as if he'd know it, if I let thathappen, he'd know it that night when he was alone over the river . . . no,that's nonsense, but here's what I feel: any man who knows what Nat Taggartfelt that night, any man living now and capable of knowing it—it's him that Iwould betray if I let it happen . . . and I can't."

"Dagny, if Nat Taggart were living now, what would he do?"

She answered involuntarily, with a swift, bitter chuckle, "He wouldn'tlast a minute!"—then corrected herself: "No, he would. He would find a way tofight them."

"How?"

"I don't know."

She noticed some tense, cautious quality in the attentive way he watchedher as he leaned forward and asked, "Dagny, the men of your Board ofDirectors are no match for Nat Taggart, are they? There's no form of contestin which they could beat him, there's nothing he'd have to fear from them,there's no mind, no will, no power in the bunch of them to equal one-thousandth of his."

"No, of course not."

"Then why is it that throughout men's history the Nat Taggarts, who makethe world, have always won—and always lost it to the men of the Board?""I . . . don't know."

"How could men who're afraid to hold an unqualified opinion about theweather, fight Nat Taggart? How could they seize his achievement, if he chose

to defend it? Dagny, he fought with every weapon he possessed, except themost important one. They could not have won, if we —he and the rest of us—hadnot given the world away to them."

"Yes, You gave it away to them. Ellis Wyatt did. Ken Danagger did, Iwon't."

He smiled. "Who built the John Gait Line for them?"

He saw only the faintest contraction of her mouth, but he knew that thequestion was like a blow across an open wound. Yet she answered quietly, "Idid. "

"For this kind of end?"

"For the men who did not hold out, would not fight and gave up.""Don't you see that no other end was possible?""No. "

"How much injustice are you willing to take?""As much as I'm able to fight.""What will you do now? Tomorrow?"

She said calmly, looking straight at him with the faintly proud look ofstressing her calm, "Start to tear it up.""What?"

"The John Gait Line. Start to tear it up as good as with my own hands—withmy own mind, by my own instructions. Get it ready to be closed, then tear itup and use its pieces to reinforce the transcontinental track. There's a lotof work to do. It will keep me busy." The calm cracked a little, in thefaintest change of her voice: "You know, I'm looking forward to it. I'm gladthat I'll have to do it myself.

That's why Nat Taggart worked all that night—just to keep going. It's notso bad as long as there's something one can do. And I'll know, at least, thatI'm saving the main line."

"Dagny," he asked very quietly—and she wondered what made her feel that helooked as if his personal fate hung on her answer, "what if it were the mainline that you had to dismember?"

She answered irresistibly, "Then I'd let the last engine run over me!"

-but added, "No. That's just self-pity. I wouldn't."

He said gently, "I know you wouldn't. But you'd wish you could."

"Yes."

He smiled, not looking at her; it was a mocking smile, but it was a smileof pain and the mockery was directed at himself. She wondered what made hercertain of it; but she knew his face so well that she would always know whathe felt, even though she could not guess his reasons any longer. She knew hisface as well, she thought, as she knew every line of his body, as she couldstill see it, as she was suddenly aware of it under his clothes, a few feetaway, in the crowding intimacy of the booth. He turned to look at her andsome sudden change in his eyes made her certain that he knew what she wasthinking. He looked away and picked up his glass.

"Well-" he said, "to Nat Taggart."

"And to Sebastian d'Anconia?" she asked—then regretted it, because it hadsounded like mockery, which she had not intended.

But she saw a look of odd, bright clarity in his eyes and he answeredfirmly, with the faintly proud smile of stressing his firmness, "Yes—and toSebastian d'Anconia,"

Her hand trembled a little and she spilled a few drops on the square ofpaper lace that lay on the dark, shining plastic of the table. She watchedhim empty his glass in a single gesture; the brusque, brief movement of hishand made it look like the gesture of some solemn pledge.

She thought suddenly that this was the first time in twelve years that hehad come to her of his own choice.

He had acted as if he were confidently in control, as if his confidencewere a transfusion to let her recapture hers, he had given her no time towonder that they should be here together. Now she felt, unaccountably, thatthe reins he had held were gone. It was only the silence of a few blankmoments and the motionless outline of his forehead, cheekbone and mouth, ashe sat with his face turned away from her—

but she felt as if it were he who was now struggling for something he hadto recapture.

She wondered what had been his purpose tonight—and noticed that he had,perhaps, accomplished it: he had carried her over the worst moment, he hadgiven her an invaluable defense against despair—the knowledge that a livingintelligence had heard her and understood. But why had he wanted to do it?Why had he cared about her hour of despair—after the years of agony he hadgiven her? Why had it mattered to him how she would take the death of theJohn Gait Line? She noticed that this was the question she had not asked himin the lobby of the Taggart Building.

This was the bond between them, she thought: that she would never beastonished if he came when she needed him most, and that he would always knowwhen to come. This was the danger: that she would trust him even whileknowing that it could be nothing but some new kind of trap, even whileremembering that he would always betray those who trusted him.

He sat, leaning forward with his arms crossed on the table, lookingstraight ahead. He said suddenly, not turning to her: "1 am thinking of thefifteen years that Sebastian d'Anconia had to wait for the woman he loved. Hedid not know whether he would ever find her again, whether she would survive. . . whether she would wait for him. But he knew that she could not livethrough his battle and that he could not call her to him until it was won. Sohe waited, holding his love in the place of the hope which he had no right tohold.

But when he carried her across the threshold of his house, as the firstSenora d'Anconia of a new world, he knew that the battle was won, that theywere free, that nothing threatened her and nothing would ever hurt heragain."

In the days of their passionate happiness, he had never given her a hintthat he would come to think of her as Senora d'Anconia. For one moment, shewondered whether she had known what she had meant to him. But the momentended in an invisible shudder: she would not believe that the past twelveyears could allow the things she was hearing to be possible. This was the newtrap, she thought.

"Francisco," she asked, her voice hard, "what have you done to HankRearden?"

He looked startled that she should think of that name at that moment"Why?" he asked.

"He told me once that you were the only man he'd ever liked. But last timeI saw him, he said that he would kill you on sight.""He did not tell you why?""No. "

"He told you nothing about it?"

"No." She saw him smiling strangely, a smile of sadness, gratitude andlonging. "I warned him that you would hurt him—when he told me that you werethe only man he liked."

His words came like a sudden explosion: "He was the only man—

with one exception—to whom I could have given my life!"

"Who is the exception?"

"The man to whom I have."

"What do you mean?"

He shook his head, as if he had said more than he intended, and did notanswer.

"What did you do to Rearden?""I'll tell you some time. Not now."

"Is that what you always do to those who . . . mean a great deal to you?"

He looked at her with a smile that had the luminous sincerity of innocenceand pain. "You know," he said gently, "I could say that that is what theyalways do to me." He added, "But I won't. The actions—and the knowledge—weremine."

He stood up. "Shall we go? I'll take you home."

She rose and he held her coat for her; it was a wide, loose garment, andhis hands guided it to enfold her body. She felt his arm remain about hershoulders a moment longer than he intended her to notice.

She glanced back at him. But he was standing oddly still, staring intentlydown at the table. In rising, they had brushed aside the mats of paper laceand she saw an inscription cut into the plastic of the table top. Attemptshad been made to erase it, but the inscription remained, as the graven voiceof some unknown drunk's despair: "Who is John Gait?"

With a brusque movement of anger, she flicked the mat back to cover thewords. He chuckled.

"I can answer it," he said. "I can tell you who is John Gait."

"Really? Everybody seems to know him, but they never tell the same storytwice."

"They're all true, though—all the stories you've heard about him.""Well, what's yours? Who is he?"

"John Gait is Prometheus who changed his mind. After centuries of beingtorn by vultures in payment for having brought to men the fire of the gods,he broke his chains and he withdrew his fire—until the day when men withdrawtheir vultures."

The band of crossties swept in wide curves around granite corners,clinging to the mountainsides of Colorado. Dagny walked down the ties,keeping her hands in her coat pockets, and her eyes on the meaninglessdistance ahead; only the familiar movement of straining her steps to thespacing of the ties gave her the physical sense of an action pertaining to arailroad.

A gray cotton, which was neither quite fog nor clouds, hung in sloppy wadsbetween sky and mountains, making the sky look like an old mattress spillingits stuffing down the sides of the peaks. A crusted snow covered the ground,belonging neither to winter nor to spring. A net of moisture hung in the air,and she felt an icy pin-prick on her face once in a while, which was neithera raindrop nor a snowflake.

The weather seemed afraid to take a stand and clung noncommittally to somesort of road's middle; Board of Directors' weather, she thought.

The light seemed drained and she could not tell whether this was theafternoon or the evening of March 31. But she was very certain that it wasMarch 31; that was a certainty not to be escaped.

She had come to Colorado with Hank Rearden, to buy whatever machinerycould still be found in the closed factories. It had been like a hurriedsearch through the sinking hulk of a great ship before it was to vanish outof reach. They could have given the task to employees, but they had come,both prompted by the same unconfessed motive: they could not resist thedesire to attend the run of the last train, as one cannot resist the desireto give a last salute by attending a funeral, even while knowing that it isonly an act of self-torture.

They had been buying machinery from doubtful owners in sales of dubiouslegality, since nobody could tell who had the right to dispose of the great,dead properties, and nobody would come to challenge the transactions. They

had bought everything that could be moved from the gutted plant of NielsenMotors. Ted Nielsen had quit and vanished, a week after the announcement thatthe Line was to be closed.

She had felt like a scavenger, but the activity of the hunt had made herable to bear these past few days. When she had found that three empty hoursremained before the departure of the last train, she had gone to walk throughthe countryside, to escape the stillness of the town. She had walked atrandom through twisting mountain trails, alone among rocks and snow, tryingto substitute motion for thought, knowing that she had to get through thisday without thinking of the summer when she had ridden the engine of thefirst train.

But she found herself walking back along the roadbed of the John GaitLine—and she knew that she had intended it, that she had gone out for thatpurpose.

It was a spur track which had already been dismembered. There were nosignal lights, no switches, no telephone wires, nothing but a long band ofwooden strips left on the ground—a chain of ties without rail, like theremnant of a spine—and, as its lonely guardian, at an abandoned gradecrossing, a pole with slanted arms saying: "Stop.

Look. Listen."

An early darkness mixed with fog was slipping down to fill the valleys,when she came upon the factory. There was an inscription high on the lustroustile of its front wall: "Roger Marsh. Electrical Appliances." The man who hadwanted to chain himself to his desk in order not to leave this, she thought.The building stood intact, like a corpse in that instant when its eyes havejust closed and one still waits to see them open again. She felt that thelights would flare up at any moment behind the great sheets of windows, underthe long, flat roofs. Then she saw one broken pane, pierced by a stone forsome young moron's enjoyment—and she saw the tall, dry stem of a single weedrising from the steps of the main entrance. Hit by a sudden, blinding hatred,in rebellion against the weed's impertinence, knowing of what enemy this wasthe scout, she ran forward, she fell on her knees and jerked the weed up byits roots. Then, kneeling on the steps of a closed factory, looking at thevast silence of mountains, brush and dusk, she thought: What do you thinkyou're doing?

It was almost dark when she reached the end of the ties that led her backto the town of Marshville. Marshville had been the end of the Line for monthspast; service to Wyatt Junction had been discontinued long ago; Dr. Ferris'Reclamation Project had been abandoned this winter.

The street lights were on, and they hung in mid-air at the intersections,in a long, diminishing line of yellow globes over the empty streets ofMarshville. All the better homes were closed—the neat, sturdy houses ofmodest cost, well built and well kept; there were faded "For Sale" signs ontheir lawns. But she saw lights in the windows of the cheap, garishstructures that had acquired, within a few years, the slovenly dilapidationof slum hovels; the homes of people who had not moved, the people who neverlooked beyond the span of one week. She saw a large new television set in thelighted room of a house with a sagging roof and cracking walls. She wonderedhow long they expected the electric power companies of Colorado to remain inexistence. Then she shook her head: those people had never known that powercompanies existed.

The main street of Marshville was lined by the black windows of shops outof business. All the luxury stores are gone—she thought, looking at theirsigns; and then she shuddered, realizing what things she now called luxury,realizing to what extent and in what manner those things, once available tothe poorest, had been luxuries: Dry Cleaning—Electrical Appliances—Gas

Station—Drug Store—Five and Ten. The only ones left open were grocery storesand saloons.

The platform of the railroad station was crowded. The glaring arc lightsseemed to pick it out of the mountains, to isolate and focus it, like a smallstage on which every movement was naked to the sight of the unseen tiersrising in the vast, encircling night. People were carting luggage, bundlingtheir children, haggling at ticket windows, the stifled panic of their mannersuggesting that what they really wanted to do was to fall down on the groundand scream with terror. Their terror had the evasive quality of guilt: it wasnot the fear that comes from understanding, but from the refusal tounderstand.

The last train stood at the platform, its windows a long, lone streak oflight. The steam of the locomotive, gasping tensely through the wheels, didnot have its usual joyous sound of energy released for a sprint; it had thesound of a panting breath that one dreads to hear and dreads more to stophearing. Far at the end of the lighted windows, she saw the small red dot ofa lantern attached to her private car. Beyond the lantern, there was nothingbut a black void.

The train was loaded to capacity, and the shrill notes of hysteria in theconfusion of voices were the pleas for space in vestibules and aisles. Somepeople were not leaving, but stood in vapid curiosity, watching the show;they had come, as if knowing that this was the last event they would everwitness in their community and, perhaps, in their lives.

She walked hastily through the crowd, trying not to look at anyone.

Some knew who she was, most of them did not. She saw an old woman with aragged shawl on her shoulders and the graph of a lifetime's struggle on thecracked skin of her face; the woman's glance was a hopeless appeal for help.An unshaved young man with gold-rimmed glasses stood on a crate under an arclight, yelling to the faces shifting past him, "What do they mean, nobusiness! Look at that train! It's full of passengers! There's plenty ofbusiness! It's just that there's no profits for them—that's why they'reletting you perish, those greedy parasites!" A disheveled woman rushed up toDagny, waving two tickets and screaming something about the wrong date. Dagnyfound herself pushing people out of the way, fighting to reach the end of thetrain—but an emaciated man, with the staring eyes of years of maliciousfutility, rushed at her, shouting, "It's all right for you, you've got a goodovercoat and a private car, but you won't give us any trains, you and all theselfish—"

He stopped abruptly, looking at someone behind her. She felt a handgrasping her elbow: it was Hank Rearden. He held her arm and led her towardher car; seeing the look on his face, she understood why people got out oftheir way. At the end of the platform, a pallid, plumpish man stood saying toa crying woman, "That's how it's always been in this world. There will be nochance for the poor, until the rich are destroyed." High above the town,hanging in black space like an uncooled planet, the flame of Wyatt's Torchwas twisting in the wind.

Rearden went inside her car, but she remained on the steps of thevestibule, delaying the finality of turning away. She heard the "All aboard!"She looked at the people who remained on the platform as one looks at thosewho watch the departure of the last lifeboat.

The conductor stood below, at the foot of the steps, with his lantern inone hand and his watch in the other. He glanced at the watch, then glanced upat her face. She answered by the silent affirmation of closing her eyes andinclining her head. She saw his lantern circling through the air, as sheturned away—and the first jolt of the wheels, on the rails of Rearden Metal,was made easier for her by the sight of Rearden, as she pulled the door openand went into her car.

When James Taggart telephoned Lillian Rearden from New York and said,"Why, no—no special reason, just wondered how you were and whether you evercame to the city—haven't seen you for ages and just thought we might havelunch together next time you're in New York"—she knew that he had some veryspecial reason in mind.

When she answered lazily, "Oh, let me see—what day is this? April second?—let me look at my calendar—why, it just so happens that I have some shoppingto do in New York tomorrow, so I'll be delighted to let you save me my lunchmoney"—he knew that she had no shopping to do and that the luncheon would bethe only purpose of her trip to the city.

They met in a distinguished, high-priced restaurant, much toodistinguished and high-priced ever to be mentioned in the gossip columns; notthe kind of place which James Taggart, always eager for personal publicity,was in the habit of patronizing; he did not want them to be seen together,she concluded.

The half-hint of half-secret amusement remained on her face while shelistened to him talking about their friends, the theater and the weather,carefully building for himself the protection of the unimportant. She satgracefully not quite straight, as if she were leaning back, enjoying thefutility of his performance and the fact that he had to stage it for herbenefit. She waited with patient curiosity to discover his purpose.

"I do think that you deserve a pat on the back or a medal or something,Jim," she said, "for being remarkably cheerful in spite of all the messytrouble you're having. Didn't you just close the best branch of yourrailroad?"

"Oh, it's only a slight financial setback, nothing more. One has to expectretrenchments at a time like this. Considering the general state of thecountry, we're doing quite well. Better than the rest of them." He added,shrugging, "Besides, it's a matter of opinion whether the Rio Norte Line wasour best branch. It is only my sister who thought so.

It was her pet project."

She caught the tone of pleasure blurring the drawl of his syllables.She smiled and said, "I see."

Looking up at her from under his lowered forehead, as if stressing that heexpected her to understand, Taggart asked, "How is he taking it?""Who?" She understood quite well."Your husband.""Taking what?""The closing of that Line."

She smiled gaily. "Your guess is as good as mine, Jim—and mine is verygood indeed,"

"What do you mean?"

"You know how he would take it—just as you know how your sister is takingit. So your cloud has a double silver lining, hasn't it?""What has he been saying in the last few days?"

"He's been away in Colorado for over a week, so I—" She stopped; she hadstarted answering lightly, but she noticed that Taggart's question had beentoo specific while his tone had been too casual, and she realized that he hadstruck the first note leading toward the purpose of the luncheon; she pausedfor the briefest instant, then finished, still more lightly, "so I wouldn'tknow. But he's coming back any day now."

"Would you say that his attitude is still what one might callrecalcitrant?"

"Why, Jim, that would be an understatement!"

"It was to be hoped that events had, perhaps, taught him the wisdom of amellower approach."

It amused her to keep him in doubt about her understanding. "Oh yes," shesaid innocently, "it would be wonderful if anything could ever make himchange."

"He is making things exceedingly hard for himself.""He always has."

"But events have a way of beating us all into a more . . . pliable frameof mind, sooner or later."

"I've heard many characteristics ascribed to him, but 'pliable' has neverbeen one of them."

"Well, things change and people change with them. After all, it is a lawof nature that animals must adapt themselves to their background.

And I might add that adaptability is the one characteristic moststringently required at present by laws other than those of nature. We're infor a very difficult time, and I would hate to see you suffer theconsequences of his intransigent attitude. I would hate—as your friend—to seeyou in the kind of danger he's headed for, unless he learns to cooperate."

"How sweet of you, Jim," she said sweetly.

He was doling his sentences out with cautious slowness, balancing himselfbetween word and intonation to hit the right degree of semi clarity. Hewanted her to understand, but he did not want her to understand fully,explicitly, down to the root—since the essence of that modern language, whichhe had learned to speak expertly, was never to let oneself or othersunderstand anything down to the root.

He had not needed many words to understand Mr. Weatherby. On his last tripto Washington, he had pleaded with Mr. Weatherby that a cut in the rates ofthe railroads would be a deathblow; the wage raises had been granted, but thedemands for the cut in rates were still heard in the press—and Taggart hadknown what it meant, if Mr. Mouch still permitted them to be heard; he hadknown that the knife was still poised at his throat. Mr. Weatherby had notanswered his pleas, but had said, in a tone of idly irrelevant speculation,"Wesley has so many tough problems. If he is to give everybody a breathingspell, financially speaking, he's got to put into operation a certainemergency program of which you have some inkling. But you know what hell theunprogressive elements of the country would raise about it. A man likeRearden, for instance. We don't want any more stunts of the sort he's liableto pull. Wesley would give a lot for somebody who could keep Rearden in line.But I guess that's something nobody can deliver.

Though I may be wrong. You may know better, Jim, since Rearden is a sortof friend of yours, who comes to your parties and all that."

Looking at Lillian across the table, Taggart said, "Friendship, I find, isthe most valuable thing in life—and I would be amiss if I didn't give youproof of mine."

"But I've never doubted it."

He lowered his voice to the tone of an ominous warning: "I think I shouldtell you, as a favor to a friend, although it's confidential, that yourhusband's attitude is being discussed in high places—very high places. I'msure you know what I mean."

This was why he hated Lillian Rearden, thought Taggart: she knew the game,but she played it with unexpected variations of her own. It was against allrules to look at him suddenly, to laugh in his face, and —after all thoseremarks showing that she understood too little—to say bluntly, showing thatshe understood too much, "Why, darling, of course I know what you mean. Youmean that the purpose of this very excellent luncheon was not a favor youwanted to do me, but a favor you wanted to get from me. You mean that it'syou who are in danger and could use that favor to great advantage for a tradein high places.

And you mean that you are reminding me of my promise to deliver thegoods."

"The sort of performance he put on at his trial was hardly what I'd calldelivering the goods," he said angrily. "It wasn't what you had led me toexpect."

"Oh my, no, it wasn't," she said placidly. "It certainly wasn't. But,darling, did you expect me not to know that after that performance of his hewouldn't be very popular in high places? Did you really think you had to tellme that as a confidential favor?"

"But it's true. I heard him discussed, so I thought I'd tell you."

"I'm sure it's true. I know that they would be discussing him. I know alsothat if there were anything they could do to him, they would have done itright after his trial. My, would they have been glad to do it! So I know thathe's the only one among you who is in no danger whatever, at the moment. Iknow that it's they who are afraid of him. Do you see how well I understandwhat you mean, darling?"

"Well, if you think you do, I must say that for my part I don't understandyou at all. I don't know what it is you're doing."

"Why, I'm just setting things straight—so that you'll know that I know howmuch you need me. And now that it's straight, I'll tell you the truth in myturn: I didn't double-cross you, I merely failed. His performance at thetrial—I didn't expect it any more than you did.

Less. I had good reason not to expect it. But something went wrong.

I don't know what it was. I am trying to find out. When I do, I will keepmy promise. Then you'll be free to take full credit for it and to tell yourfriends in high places that it's you who've disarmed him."

"Lillian," he said nervously, "I meant it when I said that I was anxiousto give you proof of my friendship—so if there's anything-1 can do for—"

She laughed. "There isn't. I know you meant it. But there's nothing youcan do for me. No favor of any kind. No trade. I'm a truly noncommercialperson, I want nothing in return. Tough luck, Jim. You'll just have to remainat my mercy."

"But then why should you want to do it at all? What are you getting out ofit?"

She leaned back, smiling. "This lunch. Just seeing you here. Just knowingthat you had to come to me."

An angry spark flashed in Taggart's veiled eyes, then his eyelids narrowedslowly and he, too, leaned back in his chair, his face relaxing to a faintlook of mockery and satisfaction. Even from within that unstated, unnamed,undefined muck which represented his code of values, he was able to realizewhich one of them was the more dependent on the other and the morecontemptible.

When they parted at the door of the restaurant, she went to Rearden'ssuite at the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, where she stayed occasionally in hisabsence. She paced the room for about half an hour, in a leisurely manner ofreflection. Then she picked up the telephone, with a smoothly casual gesture,but with the purposeful air of a decision reached. She called Rearden'soffice at the mills and asked Miss Ives when she expected him to return.

"Mr. Rearden will be in New York tomorrow, arriving on the Comet, Mrs.Rearden," said Miss Ives' clear, courteous voice.

"Tomorrow? That's wonderful. Miss Ives, would you do me a favor?

Would you call Gertrude at the house and tell her not to expect me fordinner? I'm staying in New York overnight."

She hung up, glanced at her watch and called the florist of the Wayne-Falkland. "This is Mrs. Henry Rearden," she said. "I should like to have twodozen roses delivered to Mr. Rearden's drawing room aboard the Comet. . . .

Yes, today, this afternoon, when the Comet reaches Chicago. . . . No, withoutany card—just the flowers. . . .Thank you ever so much."

She telephoned James Taggart. "Jim, will you send me a pass to yourpassenger platforms? I want to meet my husband at the station tomorrow."

She hesitated between Balph Eubank and Bertram Scudder, chose BalphEubank, telephoned him and made a date for this evening's dinner and amusical show. Then she went to take a bathl, and lay relaxing in a tub ofwarm water, reading a magazine devoted to problems of political economy.

It was late afternoon when the florist telephoned her. "Our Chicago officesent word that they were unable to deliver the flowers, Mrs.

Rearden, " he said, "because Mr. Rearden is not aboard the Comet."

"Are you sure?" she asked.

"Quite sure, Mrs. Rearden. Our man found at the station in Chicago thatthere was no compartment on the train reserved in Mr. Rearden's name. Wechecked with the New York office of Taggart Transcontinental, just to makecertain, and were told that Mr. Rearden's name is not on the passenger listof the Comet."

"I see. . . . Then cancel the order, please. . . . Thank you."

She sat by the telephone for a moment, frowning, then called Miss Ives."Please forgive me for being slightly scatterbrained, Miss Ives, but I wasrushed and did not write it down, and now I'm not quite certain of what yousaid. Did you say that Mr. Rearden was coming back tomorrow? On the Comet?"

"Yes, Mrs. Rearden."

"You have not heard of any delay or change in his plans?"

"Why, no. In fact, I spoke to Mr. Rearden about an hour ago. He telephonedfrom the station in Chicago, and he mentioned that he had to hurry backaboard, as the Comet was about to leave."

"I see. Thank you."

She leaped to her feet as soon as the click of the instrument restored herto privacy. She started pacing the room, her steps now unrhythmically tense.Then she stopped, struck by a sudden thought.

There was only one reason why a man would make a train reservation underan assumed name: if he was not traveling alone.

Her facial muscles went flowing slowly into a smile of satisfaction: thiswas an opportunity she had not expected.

Standing on the Terminal platform, at a point halfway down the length ofthe train, Lillian Rearden watched the passengers descending from the Comet.Her mouth held the hint of a smile; there was a spark of animation in herlifeless eyes; she glanced from one face to another, jerking her head withthe awkward eagerness of a schoolgirl.

She was anticipating the look on Rearden's face when, with his mistressbeside him, he would see her standing there.

Her glance darted hopefully to every flashy young female stepping off thetrain. It was hard to watch: within an instant after the first few figures,the train had seemed to burst at the seams, flooding the platform with asolid current that swept in one direction, as if pulled by a vacuum; shecould barely distinguish separate persons. The lights were more glare thanillumination, picking this one strip out of a dusty, oily darkness. Sheneeded an effort to stand still against the invisible pressure of motion.

Her first sight of Rearden in the crowd came as a shock: she had not seenhim step out of a car, but there he was, walking in her direction fromsomewhere far down the length of the train. He was alone. He was walking withhis usual purposeful speed, his hands in the pockets of his trenchcoat. Therewas no woman beside him, no companion of any kind, except a porter hurryingalong with a bag she recognized as his.

In a fury of incredulous disappointment, she looked frantically for anysingle feminine figure he could, have left behind. She felt certain that shewould recognize his choice. She saw none that could be possible. And then shesaw that the last car of the train was a private car, and that the figurestanding at its door, talking to some station official—

a figure wearing, not minks and veils, but a rough sports coat thatstressed the incomparable grace of a slender body in the confident posture ofthis station's owner and center—was Dagny Taggart. Then Lillian Reardenunderstood.

"Lillian! What's the matter?"

She heard Rearden's voice, she felt his hand grasping her arm, she saw himlooking at her as one looks at the object of a sudden emergency. He waslooking at a blank face and an unfocused glance of terror.

"What happened? What are you doing here?"

"I . . . Hello, Henry ... I just came to meet you ... No specialreason ... I just wanted to meet you." The terror was gone from her face,but she spoke in a strange, flat voice. "I wanted to see you, it was animpulse, a sudden impulse and I couldn't resist it, because—"

"But you look . . . looked ill."

"No . . . No, maybe I felt faint, it's stuffy here. ... I couldn'tresist coming, because it made me think of the days when you would have beenglad to see me ... it was a moment's illusion to recreate for myself. . .." The words sounded like a memorized lesson.

She knew that she had to speak, while her mind was fighting to grasp thefull meaning of her discovery. The words were part of the plan she hadintended to use, if she had met him after he had found the roses in hiscompartment.

He did not answer, he stood watching her, frowning.

"I missed you, Henry, I know what I am confessing. But I don't expect itto mean anything to you any longer." The words did not fit the tight face,the lips that moved with effort, the eyes that kept glancing away from himdown the length of the platform. "I wanted ... I merely wanted to surpriseyou." A look of shrewdness and purpose was returning to her face.

He took her arm, but she drew back, a little too sharply.

"Aren't you going to say a word to me, Henry?"

"What do you wish me to say?"

"Do you hate it as much as that—having your wife come to meet you at thestation?" She glanced down the platform: Dagny Taggart was walking towardthem; he did not see her.

"Let's go," he said.

She would not move. "Do you?" she asked."What?"

"Do you hate it?"

"No, I don't hate it. I merely don't understand it."

"Tell me about your trip. I'm sure you've had a very enjoyable trip.""Come on. We can talk at home."

"When do I ever have a chance to talk to you at home?" She was drawlingher words impassively, as if she were stretching them to fill time, for somereason which he could not imagine. "I had hoped to catch a few moments ofyour attention—like this—between trains and business appointments and allthose important matters that hold you day and night, all those greatachievements of yours, such as . . .

Hello, Miss Taggart!" she said sharply, her voice loud and bright.

Rearden whirled around. Dagny was walking past them, but she stopped.

"How do you do," she said to Lillian, bowing, her face expressionless.

"I am so sorry, Miss Taggart," said Lillian, smiling, "you must forgive meif I don't know the appropriate formula of condolences for the occasion." She

noted that Dagny and Rearden had not greeted each other. "You're returningfrom what was, in effect, the funeral of your child by my husband, aren'tyou?"

Dagny's mouth showed a faint line of astonishment and of contempt.

She inclined her head, by way of leave-taking, and walked on.

Lillian glanced sharply at Rearden's face, as if in deliberate emphasis.He looked at her indifferently, puzzled.

She said nothing. She followed him without a word when he turned to go.She remained silent in the taxicab, her face half-turned away from him, whilethey rode to the Wayne-Falkland Hotel. He felt certain, as he looked at thetautly twisted set of her mouth, that some uncustomary violence was ragingwithin her. He had never known her to experience a strong emotion of anykind.

She whirled to face him, the moment they were alone in his room."So that's who it is?" she asked.

He had not expected it. He looked at her, not quite believing that he hadunderstood it correctly.

"It's Dagny Taggart who's your mistress, isn't she?"He did not answer.

"I happen to know that you had no compartment on that train. So I knowwhere you've slept for the last four nights. Do you want to admit it or doyou want me to send detectives to question her train crews and her houseservants? Is it Dagny Taggart?"

"Yes," he answered calmly.

Her mouth twisted into an ugly chuckle; she was staring past him."I should have known it. I should have guessed. That's why it didn'twork!"

He asked, in blank bewilderment, "What didn't work?"

She stepped back, as if to remind herself of his presence. "Had you—when she was in our house, at the party—had you, then . . . ?""No. Since."

"The great businesswoman," she said, "above reproach and feminineweaknesses. The great mind detached from any concern with the body . . ." Shechuckled, "The bracelet . . ." she said, with the still look that made itsound as if the words were dropped accidentally out of the torrent in hermind. "That's what she meant to you. That's the weapon she gave you."

"If you really understand what you're saying—yes."

"Do you think I'll let you get away with it?"

"Get away . . . ?" He was looking at her incredulously, in cold,astonished curiosity.

"That's why, at your trial—" She stopped."What about my trial?"

She was trembling. "You know, of course, that I won't allow this tocontinue."

"What does it have to do with my trial?"

"I won't permit you to have her. Not her. Anyone but her."He let a moment pass, then asked evenly, "Why?"

"I won't permit it! You'll give it up!" He was looking at her withoutexpression, but the steadiness of his eyes hit her as his most dangerousanswer. "You'll give it up, you'll leave her, you'll never see her again!"

"Lillian, if you wish to discuss it, there's one thing you'd betterunderstand; nothing on earth will make me give it up."

"But I demand it!"

"I told you that you could demand anything but that."

He saw the look of a peculiar panic growing in her eyes: it was not thelook of understanding, but of a ferocious refusal to understand—as if shewanted to turn the violence of her emotion into a fog screen, as if she

hoped, not that it would blind her to reality, but that her blindness wouldmake reality cease to exist.

"But I have the right to demand it! I own your life! It's my property.

My property—by your own oath. You swore to serve my happiness, Not yours—mine! What have you done for me? You've given me nothing, you've sacrificednothing, you've never been concerned with anything but yourself—your work,your mills, your talent, your mistress!

What about me? I hold first claim! I'm presenting it for collection!

You're the account I own!"

It was the look on his face that drove her up the rising steps of hervoice, scream by scream, into terror. She was seeing, not anger or pain orguilt, but the one inviolate enemy: indifference.

"Have you thought of me?" she screamed, her voice breaking against hisface. "Have you thought of what you're doing to me? You have no right to goon, if you know that you're putting me through hell every time you sleep withthat woman! I can't stand it, I can't stand one moment of knowing it! Willyou sacrifice me to your animal desire? Are you as vicious and selfish asthat? Can you buy your pleasure at the price of my suffering? Can you haveit, if this is what it does to me?"

Feeling nothing but the emptiness of wonder, he observed the thing whichhe had glimpsed briefly in the past and was now seeing in the full uglinessof its futility: the spectacle of pleas for pity delivered, in snarlinghatred, as threats and as demands.

"Lillian," he said very quietly, "I would have it, even if it took yourlife."

She heard it. She heard more than he was ready to know and to hear in hisown words. The shock, to him, was that she did not scream in answer, but thathe saw her, instead, shrinking down into calm. "You have no right . . ." shesaid dully. It had the embarrassing helplessness of the words of a person whoknows her own words to be meaningless.

"Whatever claim you may have on me," he said, "no human being can hold onanother a claim demanding that he wipe himself out of existence."

"Does she mean as much as that to you?"

"Much more than that."

The look of thought was returning to her face, but in her face it had thequality of a look of cunning. She remained silent.

"Lillian, I'm glad that you know the truth. Now you can make a choice withfull understanding. You may divorce me—or you may ask that we continue as weare. That is the only choice you have. It is all I can offer you. I think youknow that I want you to divorce me. But I don't ask for sacrifices. I don'tknow what sort of comfort you can find in our marriage, but if you do, Iwon't ask you to give it up. I don't know why you should want to hold me now,I don't know what it is that I mean to you, I don't know what you're seeking,what form of happiness is yours or what you will obtain from a situationwhich I see as intolerable for both of us. By every standard of mine, youshould have divorced me long ago. By every standard of mine, to maintain ourmarriage will be a vicious fraud. But my standards are not yours. I do notunderstand yours, I never have, but I will accept them. If this is the mannerof your love for me, if bearing the name of my wife will give you some formof contentment, I won't take it away from you. It's I who've broken my word,so I will atone for it to the extent I can. You know, of course, that I couldbuy one of those modern judges and obtain a divorce any time I wished. Iwon't do it. I will keep my word, if you so desire, but this is the only formin which I can keep it. Now make your choice—but if you choose to hold me,you must never speak to me about her, you must never show her that you know,if you meet her in the future, you must never touch that part of my life."

She stood still, looking up at him, the posture of her body slouched andloose, as if its sloppiness were a form of defiance, as if she did not careto resume for his sake the discipline of a graceful bearing.

"Miss Dagny Taggart . . ." she said, and chuckled. "The superwoman whomcommon, average wives were not supposed to suspect.

The woman who cared for nothing but business and dealt with men as a man.The woman of great spirit who admired you platonically, just for your genius,your mills and your Metal!" She chuckled. "I should have known that she wasjust a bitch who wanted you in the same way as any bitch would want you—because you are fully as expert in bed as you are at a desk, if I am a judgeof such matters. But she would appreciate that better than I, since sheworships expertness of any kind and since she has probably been laid by everysection hand on her railroad!"

She stopped, because she saw, for the first time in her life, by what sortof look one learns that a man is capable of killing. But he was not lookingat her. She was not sure whether he was seeing her at all or hearing hervoice.

He was hearing his own voice saying her words—saying them to Dagny in thesun-striped bedroom of Ellis Wyatt's house. He was seeing, in the nightsbehind him, Dagny's face in those moments when, his body leaving hers, shelay still with a look of radiance that was more than a smile, a look ofyouth, of early morning, of gratitude to the fact of one's own existence. Andhe was seeing Lillian's face, as he had seen it in bed beside him, a lifelessface with evasive eyes, with some feeble sneer on its lips and the look ofsharing some smutty guilt. He saw who was the accuser and who the accused—hesaw the obscenity of letting impotence hold itself as virtue and damn thepower of living as a sin-he saw, with the clarity of direct perception, in the shock of a singleinstant, the terrible ugliness of that which had once been his own belief.

It was only an instant, a conviction without words, a knowledge grasped asa feeling, left unsealed by his mind. The shock brought him back to the sightof Lillian and to the sound of her words. She appeared to him suddenly assome inconsequential presence that had to be dealt with at the moment.

"Lillian," he said, in an unstressed voice that did not grant her even thehonor of anger, "you are not to speak of her to me. If you ever do it again,I will answer you as I would answer a hoodlum: I will beat you up. Neitheryou nor anyone else is to discuss her."

She glanced at him. "Really?" she said. It had an odd, casual sound —as ifthe word were tossed away, leaving some hook implanted in her mind. Sheseemed to be considering some sudden vision of her own.

He said quietly, in weary astonishment, "I thought you would be glad todiscover the truth. I thought you would prefer to know—for the sake ofwhatever love or respect you felt for me—that if I betrayed you, it was notcheaply and casually, it was not for a chorus girl, but for the cleanest andmost serious feeling of my life."

The ferocious spring with which she whirled to him was involuntary, as wasthe naked twist of hatred in her face. "Oh, you goddamn fool!"

He remained silent.

Her composure returned, with the faint suggestion of a smile of secretmockery. "I believe you're waiting for my answer?" she said. "No, I won'tdivorce you. Don't ever hope for that. We shall continue as we are—if that iswhat you offered and if you think it can continue. See whether you can floutall moral principles and get away with it!"

He did not listen to her while she reached for her coat, telling him thatshe was going back to their home. He barely noticed it when the door closedafter her. He stood motionless, held by a feeling he had never experiencedbefore. He knew that he would have to think later, to think and understand,

but for the moment he wanted nothing but to observe the wonder of what hefelt.

It was a sense of freedom, as if he stood alone in the midst of an endlesssweep of clean air, with only the memory of some weight that had been tornoff his shoulders. It was the feeling of an immense deliverance. It was theknowledge that it did not matter to him what Lillian felt, what she sufferedor what became of her, and more: not only that it did not matter, but theshining, guiltless knowledge that it did not have to matter.

CHAPTER VIMIRACLE METAL

"But can we get away with it?" asked Wesley Mouch. His voice was high withanger and thin with fear.

Nobody answered him. James Taggart sat on the edge of an armchair, notmoving, looking up at him from under his forehead, Orren Boyle gave a vicioustap against an ashtray, shaking the ash off his cigar. Dr.

Floyd Ferris smiled. Mr. Weatherby folded his lips and hands. Fred Kinnan,head of the Amalgamated Labor of America, stopped pacing the office, sat downon the window sill and crossed his arms. Eugene Lawson, who had sat huncheddownward, absent-mindedly rearranging a display of flowers on a low glasstable, raised his torso resentfully and glanced up. Mouch sat at his desk,with his fist on a sheet of paper.

It was Eugene Lawson who answered. "That's not, it seems to me, the way toput it. We must not let vulgar difficulties obstruct our feeling that it's anoble plan motivated solely by the public welfare. It's for the good of thepeople. The people need it. Need comes first, so we don't have to consideranything else."

Nobody objected or picked it up; they looked as if Lawson had merely madeit harder to continue the discussion. But a small man who sat unobtrusivelyin the best armchair of the room, apart from the others, content to beignored and fully aware that none of them could be unconscious of hispresence, glanced at Lawson, then at Mouch, and said with brisk cheerfulness,"That's the line, Wesley. Tone it down and dress it up and get your pressboys to chant it—and you won't have to worry."

"Yes, Mr. Thompson," said Mouch glumly.

Mr. Thompson, the Head of the State, was a man who possessed the qualityof never being noticed. In any group of three, his person becameindistinguishable, and when seen alone it seemed to evoke a group of its own,composed of the countless persons he resembled.

The country had no clear image of what he looked like: his photographs hadappeared on the covers of magazines as frequently as those of hispredecessors in office, but people could never be quite certain whichphotographs were his and which were pictures of "a mail clerk"

or "a white-collar worker," accompanying articles about the daily life ofthe undifferentiated—except that Mr. Thompson's collars were usually wilted.He had broad shoulders and a slight body. He had stringy hair, a wide mouthand an elastic age range that made him look like a harassed forty or anunusually vigorous sixty. Holding enormous official powers, he schemedceaselessly to expand them, because it was expected of him by those who hadpushed him into office. He had the cunning of the unintelligent and thefrantic energy of the lazy. The sole secret of his rise in life was the factthat he was a product of chance and knew it and aspired to nothing else.

"It's obvious that measures have to be taken. Drastic measures,"

said James Taggart, speaking, not to Mr. Thompson, but to Wesley Mouch."We can't let things go the way they're going much longer."

His voice was belligerent and shaky.

"Take it easy, Jim," said Orren Boyle.

"Something's got to be done and done fast!"

"Don't look at me," snapped Wesley Mouch. "I can't help it. I can't helpit if people refuse to co-operate. I'm tied. I need wider powers."

Mouch had summoned them all to Washington, as his friends and personaladvisers, for a private, unofficial conference on the national crisis. But,watching him, they were unable to decide whether his manner was overbearingor whining, whether he was threatening them or pleading for their help.

"Fact is," said Mr. Weatherby primly, in a statistical tone of voice,"that in the twelve-month period ending on the first of this year, the rateof business failures has doubled, as compared with the preceding twelve-monthperiod. Since the first of this year, it has trebled."

"Be sure they think it's their own fault," said Dr. Ferris casually.

"Huh?" said Wesley Mouch, his eyes darting to Ferris.

"Whatever you do, don't apologize," said Dr, Ferris. "Make them feelguilty."

"I'm not apologizing!" snapped Mouch. "I'm not to blame. I need widerpowers."

"But it is their own fault, " said Eugene Lawson, turning aggressively toDr. Ferris. "It's their lack of social spirit. They refuse to recognize thatproduction is not a private choice, but a public duty. They have no right tofail, no matter what conditions happen to come up. They've got to go onproducing. It's a social imperative. A man's work is not a personal matter,it's a social matter. There's no such thing as a personal matter—or apersonal life. That's what we've got to force them to learn."

"Gene Lawson knows what I'm talking about," said Dr. Ferris, with a slightsmile, "even though he hasn't the faintest idea that he does."

"What do you think you mean?" asked Lawson, his voice rising.

"Skip it," ordered Wesley Mouch.

"I don't care what you decide to do, Wesley," said Mr. Thompson, "and Idon't care if the businessmen squawk about it. Just be sure you've got thepress with you. Be damn sure about that."

"I've got 'em," said Mouch.

"One editor who'd open his trap at the wrong time could do us more harmthan ten disgruntled millionaires."

"That's true, Mr. Thompson," said Dr. Ferris. "But can you name one editorwho knows it?"

"Guess not," said Mr. Thompson; he sounded pleased.

"Whatever type of men we're counting on and planning for," said Dr.Ferris, "there's a certain old-fashioned quotation which we may safelyforget: the one about counting on the wise and the honest. We don't have toconsider them. They're out of date."

James Taggart glanced at the window. There were patches of blue in the skyabove the spacious streets of Washington, the faint blue of mid-April, and afew beams breaking through the clouds, A monument stood shining in thedistance, hit by a ray of sun: it was a tall, white obelisk, erected to thememory of the man Dr. Ferris was quoting, the man in whose honor this cityhad been named. James Taggart looked away.

"I don't like the professor's remarks," said Lawson loudly and sullenly.

"Keep still," said Wesley Mouch. "Dr. Ferris is not talking theory, butpractice. "

"Well, if you want to talk practice," said Fred Kinnan, "then let me tellyou that we can't worry about businessmen at a time like this.

What we've got to think about is jobs. More jobs for the people. In myunions, every man who's working is feeding five who aren't, not counting hisown pack of starving relatives. If you want my advice—

oh, I know you won't go for it, but it's just a thought—issue a directivemaking it compulsory to add, say, one-third more men to every payroll in thecountry. "

"Good God!" yelled Taggart. "Are you crazy? We can barely meet ourpayrolls as it is! There's not enough work for the men we've got now! One-third more? We wouldn't have any use for them whatever!"

"Who cares whether you'd have any use for them?" said Fred Kinnan. "Theyneed jobs. That's what comes first—need—doesn't it?—

not your profits."

"It's not a question of profits!" yelled Taggart hastily. "I haven't saidanything about profits. I haven't given you any grounds to insult me.

It's just a question of where in hell we'd get the money to pay your men—when half our trains are running empty and there's not enough freight to filla trolley car." His voice slowed down suddenly to a tone of cautiousthoughtfulness: "However, we do understand the plight of the working men,and—it's just a thought —we could, perhaps, take on a certain extra number,if we were permitted to double our freight rates, which—"

"Have you lost your mind?" yelled Orren Boyle. "I'm going broke on therates you're charging now, I shudder every time a damn boxcar pulls in or outof the mills, they're bleeding me to death, I can't afford it—and you want todouble it?"

"It is not essential whether you can afford it or not," said Taggartcoldly, "You have to be prepared to make some sacrifices. The public needsrailroads. Need conies first—above your profits."

"What profits?" yelled Orren Boyle. "When did I ever make any profits?Nobody can accuse me of running a profit-making business!

Just look at my balance sheet—and then look at the books of a certaincompetitor of mine, who's got all the customers, all the raw materials, allthe technical advantages and a monopoly on secret formulas—then tell me who'sthe profiteer! . . . But, of course, the public does need railroads, andperhaps I could manage to absorb a certain raise in rates, if I were to get-it's just a thought—if I were to get a subsidy to carry me over the next yearor two, until I catch my stride and—"

"What? Again?" yelled Mr. Weatherby, losing his primness. "How many loanshave you got from us and how many extensions, suspensions and moratoriums?You haven't repaid a penny—and with all of you boys going broke and the taxreceipts crashing, where do you expect us to get the money to hand you asubsidy?"

"There are people who aren't broke," said Boyle slowly. "You boys have noexcuse for permitting all that need and misery to spread through the country—so long as there are people who aren't broke."

"I can't help it!" yelled Wesley Mouch. "I can't do anything about it!

I need wider powers!"

They could not tell what had prompted Mr. Thompson to attend thisparticular conference. He had said little, but had listened with interest. Itseemed as if there were something which he had wanted to learn, and now helooked as if he had learned it. He stood up and smiled cheerfully.

"Go ahead, Wesley," he said. "Go ahead with Number 10-289. You won't haveany trouble at all,"

They had all risen to their feet, in gloomily reluctant deference. WesleyMouch glanced down at his sheet of paper, then said in a petulant tone ofvoice, "If you want me to go ahead, you'll have to declare a state of totalemergency."

"I'll declare it any time you're ready."

"There are certain difficulties, which—"

"I'll leave it up to you. Work it out any way you wish. It's your job.

Let me see the rough draft, tomorrow or next day, but don't bother meabout the details. I've got a speech to make on the radio in half an hour."

"The chief difficulty is that I'm not sure whether the law actually grantsus the power to put into effect certain provisions of Directive Number 10-289.1 fear they might be open to challenge."

"Oh hell, we've passed so many emergency laws that if you hunt throughthem, you're sure to dig up something that will cover it."

Mr. Thompson turned to the others with a smile of good fellowship.

"I'll leave you boys to iron out the wrinkles," he said. "I appreciateyour coming to Washington to help us out. Glad to have seen you."

They waited until the door closed after him, then resumed their seats;they did not look at one another.

They had not heard the text of Directive No. 10-289, but they knew what itwould contain. They had known it for a long time, in that special mannerwhich consisted of keeping secrets from oneself and leaving knowledgeuntranslated into words. And, by the same method, they now wished it werepossible for them not to hear the words of the directive. It was to avoidmoments such as this that all the complex twistings of their minds had beendevised, They wished the directive to go into effect. They wished it could beput into effect without words, so that they would not have to know that whatthey were doing was what it was. Nobody had ever announced that Directive No.10-289 was the final goal of his efforts.

Yet, for generations past, men had worked to make it possible, and formonths past, every provision of it had been prepared for by countlessspeeches, articles, sermons, editorials—by purposeful voices that screamedwith anger if anyone named their purpose.

'The picture now is this," said Wesley Mouch. "The economic condition ofthe country was better the year before last than it was last year, and lastyear it was better than it is at present. It's obvious that we would not beable to survive another year of the same progression.

Therefore, our sole objective must now be to hold the line. To stand stillin order to catch our stride. To achieve total stability. Freedom has beengiven a chance and has failed. Therefore, more stringent controls arenecessary. Since men are unable and unwilling to solve their problemsvoluntarily, they must be forced to do it." He paused, picked up the sheet ofpaper, then added in a less formal tone of voice, "Hell, what it comes downto is that we can manage to exist as and where we are, but we can't afford tomove! So we've got to stand still. We've got to stand still. We've got tomake those bastards stand still!"

His head drawn into his shoulders, he was looking at them with the angerof a man declaring that the country's troubles were a personal affront tohim. So many men seeking favors had been afraid of him that he now acted asif his anger were a solution to everything, as if his anger were omnipotent,as if all he had to do was to get angry.

Yet, facing him, the men who sat in a silent semicircle before his deskwere uncertain whether the presence of fear in the room was their own emotionor whether the hunched figure behind the desk generated the panic of acornered rat.

Wesley Mouch had a long, square face and a flat-topped skull, made more soby a brush haircut. His lower lip was a petulant bulb and the pale, brownishpupils of his eyes looked like the yolks of eggs smeared under the not fullytranslucent whites. His facial muscles moved abruptly, and the movementvanished, having conveyed no expression.

No one had ever seen him smile.

Wesley Mouch came from a family that had known neither poverty nor wealthnor distinction for many generations; it had clung, however, to a traditionof its own: that of being college-bred and, therefore, of despising men whowere in business. The family's diplomas had always hung on the wall in themanner of a reproach to the world, because the diplomas had not automaticallyproduced the material equivalents of their attested spiritual value. Amongthe family's numerous relatives, there was one rich uncle. He had married hismoney and, in his widowed old age, he had picked Wesley as his favorite fromamong his many nephews and nieces, because Wesley was the least distinguishedof the lot and therefore, thought Uncle Julius, the safest. Uncle Julius didnot care for people who were brilliant. He did not care for the trouble ofmanaging his money, either; so he turned the job over to Wesley. By the timeWesley graduated from college, there was no money left to manage. Uncle

Julius blamed it on Wesley's cunning and cried that Wesley was anunscrupulous schemer.

But there had been no scheme about it; Wesley could not have said justwhere the money had gone. In high school, Wesley Mouch had been one of theworst students and had passionately envied those who were the best. Collegetaught him that he did not have to envy them at all. After graduation, hetook a job in the advertising department of a company that manufactured abogus corn-cure. The cure sold well and he rose to be the head of hisdepartment. He left it to take charge of the advertising of a hair-restorer,then of a patented brassiere, then of a new soap, then of a soft drink—andthen he became advertising vice-president of an automobile concern. He triedto sell automobiles as if they were a bogus corn-cure. They did not sell.

He blamed it on the insufficiency of his advertising budget. It was thepresident of the automobile concern who recommended him to Rearden. It wasRearden who introduced him to Washington—Rearden, who knew no standard bywhich to judge the activities of his Washington man. It was James Taggart whogave him a start in the Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources—inexchange for double crossing Rearden in order to help Orren Boyle in exchangefor destroying Dan Conway. From then on, people helped Wesley Mouch toadvance, for the same reason as that which had prompted Uncle Julius: theywere people who believed that mediocrity was safe. The men who now sat infront of his desk had been taught that the law of causality was asuperstition and that one had to deal with the situation of the momentwithout considering its cause. By the situation of the moment, they hadconcluded that Wesley Mouch was a man of superlative skill and cunning, sincemillions aspired to power, but he was the one who had achieved it. It was notwithin their method of thinking to know that Wesley Mouch was the zero at themeeting point of forces unleashed in destruction against one another.

"This is just a rough draft of Directive Number 10-289," said WesleyMouch, "which Gene, Clem and I have dashed off just to give you the generalidea. We want to hear your opinions, suggestions and so forth—you being therepresentatives of labor, industry, transportation and the professions."

Fred Rinnan got off the window sill and sat down on the arm of a chair.Orren Boyle spit out the butt of his cigar. James Taggart looked down at hisown hands. Dr. Ferris was the only one who seemed to be at ease.

"In the name of the general welfare," read Wesley Mouch, "to protect thepeople's security, to achieve full equality and total stability, it isdecreed for the duration of the national emergency that—

"Point One. All workers, wage earners and employees of any kind whatsoevershall henceforth be attached to their jobs and shall not leave nor bedismissed nor change employment, under penalty of a term in jail. The penaltyshall be determined by the Unification Board, such Board to be appointed bythe Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources. All persons reachingthe age of twenty-one shall report to the Unification Board, which shallassign them to where, in its opinion, their services will best serve theinterests of the nation.

"Point Two. All industrial, commercial, manufacturing and businessestablishments of any nature whatsoever shall henceforth remain in operation,and the owners of such establishments shall not quit nor leave nor retire,nor close, sell or transfer their business, under penalty of thenationalization of their establishment and of any and all of their property.

"Point Three. All patents and copyrights, pertaining to any devices,inventions, formulas, processes and works of any nature whatsoever, shall beturned over to the nation as a patriotic emergency gift by means of GiftCertificates to be signed voluntarily by the owners of all such patents andcopyrights. The Unification Board shall then license the use of such patentsand copyrights to all applicants, equally and without discrimination, for the

purpose of eliminating monopolistic practices, discarding obsolete productsand making the best available to the whole nation. No trademarks, brand namesor copyrighted titles shall be used. Every formerly patented product shall beknown by a new name and sold by all manufacturers under the same name, suchname to be selected by the Unification Board. All private trademarks andbrand names are hereby abolished.

"Point Four. No new devices, inventions, products, or goods of any naturewhatsoever, not now on the market, shall be produced, invented, manufacturedor sold after the date of this directive. The Office of Patents andCopyrights is hereby suspended.

"Point Five. Every establishment, concern, corporation or person engagedin production of any nature whatsoever shall henceforth produce the sameamount of goods per year as it, they or he produced during the Basic Year, nomore and no less. The year to be known as the Basic or Yardstick Year is tobe the year ending on the date of this directive. Over or under productionshall be fined, such fines to be determined by the Unification Board.

"Point Six. Every person of any age, sex, class or income, shallhenceforth spend the same amount of money on the purchase of goods per yearas he or she spent during the Basic Year, no more and no less.

Over or under purchasing shall be fined, such fines to be determined bythe Unification Board.

"Point Seven. All wages, prices, salaries, dividends, profits, interestrates and forms of income of any nature whatsoever, shall be frozen at theirpresent figures, as of the date of this directive.

"Point Eight. All cases arising from and rules not specifically providedfor in this directive, shall be settled and determined by the UnificationBoard, whose decisions will be final."

There was, even within the four men who had listened, a remnant of humandignity, which made them sit still and feel sick for the length of oneminute.

James Taggart spoke first. His voice was low, but it had the tremblingintensity of an involuntary scream: "Well, why not? Why should they have it,if we don't? Why should they stand above us? If we are to perish, let's makesure that we all perish together. Let's make sure that we leave them nochance to survive!"

"That's a damn funny thing to say about a very practical plan that willbenefit everybody, " said Orren Boyle shrilly, looking at Taggart infrightened astonishment.

Dr. Ferris chuckled.

Taggart's eyes seemed to focus, and he said, his voice louder, "Yes, ofcourse. It's a very practical plan. It's necessary, practical and just.

It will solve everybody's problems. It will give everybody a chance tofeel safe. A chance to rest."

"It will give security to the people," said Eugene Lawson, his mouthslithering into a smile. "Security—that's what the people want. If they wantit, why shouldn't they have it? Just because a handful of rich will object?"

"It's not the rich who'll object," said Dr. Ferris lazily. "The rich droolfor security more than any other sort of animal—haven't you discovered thatyet?"

"Well, who'll object?" snapped Lawson.

Dr. Ferris smiled pointedly, and did not answer.

Lawson looked away. "To hell with them! Why should we worry about them?We've got to run the world for the sake of the little people. It'sintelligence that's caused all the troubles of humanity. Man's mind is theroot of all evil. This is the day of the heart. It's the weak, the meek, thesick and the humble that must be the only objects of our concern," His lowerUp was twisting in soft, lecherous motions.

"Those who're big are here to serve those who aren't. If they refuse to dotheir moral duty, we've got to force them. There once was an Age of Reason,but we've progressed beyond it. This is the Age of Love."

"Shut up!" screamed James Taggart.

They all stared at him. "For Christ's sake, Jim, what's the matter?"said Orren Boyle, shaking.

"Nothing," said Taggart, "nothing . . . Wesley, keep him still, will you?"

Mouch said uncomfortably, "But I fail to see—"

"Just keep him still. We don't have to listen to him, do we?"

"Why, no, but-"

"Then let's go on."

"What is this?" demanded Lawson, "I resent it. I most emphatically—" Buthe saw no support in the faces around him and stopped, his mouth sagging intoan expression of pouting hatred.

"Let's go on," said Taggart feverishly.

"What's the matter with you?" asked Orren Boyle, trying not to know whatwas the matter with himself and why he felt frightened.

"Genius is a superstition, Jim," said Dr. Ferris slowly, with an odd kindof emphasis, as if knowing that he was naming the unnamed in all their minds."There's no such thing as the intellect. A man's brain is a social product. Asum of influences that he's picked up from those around him. Nobody inventsanything, he merely reflects what's floating in the social atmosphere. Agenius is an intellectual scavenger and a greedy hoarder of the ideas whichrightfully belong to society, from which he stole them. All thought is theft.If we do away with private fortunes, we'll have a fairer distribution ofwealth. If we do away with the genius, we'll have a faker distribution ofideas. "

"Are we here to talk business or are we here to kid one another?"asked Fred Kinnan.

They turned to him. He was a muscular man with large features, but hisface had the astonishing property of finely drawn lines that raised thecorners of his mouth into the permanent hint of a wise, sardonic grin. He saton the arm of the chair, hands in pockets, looking at Mouch with the smilingglance of a hardened policeman at a shoplifter.

"All I've got to say is that you'd better staff that Unification Boardwith my men," he said. "Better make sure of it, brother—or I'll blast yourPoint One to hell."

"I intend, of course, to have a representative of labor on that Board,"said Mouch dryly, "as well as a representative of industry, of theprofessions and of every cross-section of—"

"No cross-sections," said Fred Kinnan evenly. "Just representatives oflabor. Period."

"What the hell!" yelled Orren Boyle. "That's stacking the cards, isn'tit?"

"Sure," said Fred Kinnan.

"But that will give you a stranglehold on every business in the country!""What do you think I'm after?"

"That's unfair!" yelled Boyle. "I won't stand for it! You have no right!You-"

"Right?" said Kinnan innocently. "Are we talking about rights?""But, I mean, after all, there are certain fundamental property rightswhich—"

"Listen, pal, you want Point Three, don't you?""Well, I-"

"Then you'd better keep your trap shut about property rights from now on.Keep it shut tight."

"Mr. Kinnan," said Dr. Ferris, "you must not make the old fashionedmistake of drawing wide generalizations. Our policy has to be flexible. Thereare no absolute principles which—"

"Save it for Jim Taggart, Doc," said Fred Kinnan. "I know what I'm talkingabout. That's because I never went to college."

"I object," said Boyle, "to your dictatorial method of—"

Kinnan turned his back on him and said, "Listen, Wesley, my boys won'tlike Point One. If I get to run things, I'll make them swallow it. If not,not. Just make up your mind,"

"Well—" said Mouch, and stopped.

"For Christ's sake, Wesley, what about us?" yelled Taggart.

"You'll come to me," said Kinnan, "when you'll need a deal to fix theBoard. But I'll run that Board. Me and Wesley."

"Do you think the country will stand for it?" yelled Taggart.

"Stop kidding yourself," said Kinnan. "The country? If there aren't anyprinciples any more—and I guess the doc is right, because there sure aren't—if there aren't any rules to this game and it's only a question of who robswhom—then I've got more votes than the bunch of you, there are more workersthan employers, and don't you forget it, boys!"

"That's a funny attitude to take," said Taggart haughtily, "about ameasure which, after all, is not designed for the selfish benefit of workersor employers, but for the general welfare of the public."

"Okay," said Kinnan amiably, "let's talk your lingo. Who is the public? Ifyou go by quality—then it ain't you, Jim, and it ain't Orrie Boyle. If you goby quantity—then it sure is me, because quantity is what I've got behind me."His smile disappeared, and with a sudden, bitter look of weariness he added,"Only I'm not going to say that I'm working for the welfare of my public,because I know I'm not. I know that I'm delivering the poor bastards intoslavery, and that's all there is to it. And they know it, too. But they knowthat I'll have to throw them a crumb once in a while, if I want to keep myracket, while with the rest of you they wouldn't have a chance in hell. Sothat's why, if they've got to be under a whip, they'd rather I held it, notyou—you drooling, tear-jerking, mealy-mouthed bastards of the public welfare!

Do you think that outside of your college-bred pansies there's one villageidiot whom you're fooling? I'm a racketeer—but I know it and my boys know it,and they know that I'll pay off. Not out of the kindness of my heart, either,and not a cent more than I can get away with, but at least they can count onthat much. Sure, it makes me sick sometimes, it makes me sick right now, butit's not me who's built this kind of world—you did—so I'm playing the game asyou've set it up and I'm going to play it for as long as it lasts—which isn'tgoing to be long for any of us! "

He stood up. No one answered him. He let his eyes move slowly from face toface and stop on Wesley Mouch.

"Do I get the Board, Wesley?" he asked casually.

"The selection of the specific personnel is only a technical detail,"said Mouch pleasantly. "Suppose we discuss it later, you and I?"Everybody in the room knew that this meant the answer Yes.

"Okay, pal," said Kinnan. He went back to the window, sat down on the silland lighted a cigarette.

For some unadmitted reason, the others were looking at Dr. Ferris, as ifseeking guidance.

"Don't be disturbed by oratory," said Dr. Ferris smoothly. "Mr.

Kinnan is a fine speaker, but he has no sense of practical reality. He isunable to think dialectically."

There was another silence, then James Taggart spoke up suddenly.

"I don't care. It doesn't matter. He'll have to hold things still.Everything will have to remain as it is. Just as it is. Nobody will bepermitted to change anything. Except—" He turned sharply to Wesley Mouch.

"Wesley, under Point Four, we'll have to close all research departments,experimental laboratories, scientific foundations and all the rest of theinstitutions of that kind. They'll have to be forbidden."

"Yes, that's right," said Mouch. "I hadn't thought of that. We'll have tostick in a couple of lines about that." He hunted around for a pencil andmade a few scrawls on the margin of his paper.

"It will end wasteful competition," said James Taggart. "We'll stopscrambling to beat one another to the untried and the unknown. We won't haveto worry about new inventions upsetting the market. We won't have to pourmoney down the drain in useless experiments just to keep up with overambitious competitors."

"Yes," said Orren Boyle. "Nobody should be allowed to waste money on thenew until everybody has plenty of the old. Close all those damn researchlaboratories—and the sooner, the better."

"Yes," said Wesley Mouch. "We'll close them. All of them."

"The State Science Institute, too?" asked Fred Kinnan.

"Oh, no!" said Mouch. "That's different. That's government. Besides, it'sa non-profit institution. And it will be sufficient to take care of allscientific progress."

"Quite sufficient," said Dr. Ferris.

"And what will become of all the engineers, professors and such, when youclose all those laboratories?" asked Fred Kinnan. "What are they going to dofor a living, with all the other jobs and businesses frozen?"

"Oh," said Wesley Mouch. He scratched his head. He turned to Mr.

Weatherby. "Do we put them on relief, Clem?"

"No," said Mr. Weatherby. "What for? There's not enough of them to raise asquawk. Not enough to matter."

"I suppose," said Mouch, turning to Dr. Ferris, "that you'll be able toabsorb some of them, Floyd?"

"Some," said Dr. Ferris slowly, as if relishing every syllable of hisanswer. "Those who prove co-operative."

"What about the rest?" asked Fred Kinnan.

"They'll have to wait till the Unification Board finds some use for them,"said Wesley Mouch.

"What will they eat while they're waiting?"

Mouch shrugged. "There's got to be some victims in times of nationalemergency. It can't be helped."

"We have the right to do it!" cried Taggart suddenly, in defiance to thestillness of the room. "We need it. We need it, don't we?" There was noanswer. "We have the right to protect our livelihood!" Nobody opposed him,but he went on with a shrill, pleading insistence. "We'll be safe for thefirst time in centuries. Everybody will know his place and job, and everybodyelse's place and job—and we won't be at the mercy of every stray crank with anew idea. Nobody will push us out of business or steal our markets orundersell us or make us obsolete.

Nobody will come to us offering some damn new gadget and putting us on thespot to decide whether we'll lose our shirt if we buy it, or whether we'lllose our shirt if we don't but somebody else does! We won't have to decide.Nobody will be permitted to decide anything.

It will be decided once and for all." His glance moved pleadingly fromface to face. "There's been enough invented already—enough for everybody'scomfort—why should they be allowed to go on inventing?

Why should we permit them to blast the ground from under our feet everyfew steps? Why should we be kept on the go in eternal uncertainty? Just

because of a few restless, ambitious adventurers? Should we sacrifice thecontentment of the whole of mankind to the greed of a few non-conformists? Wedon't need them. We don't need them at all.

I wish we'd get rid of that hero worship! Heroes? They've done nothing butharm, all through history. They've kept mankind running a wild race, with nobreathing spell, no rest, no ease, no security. Running to catch up with them. . . always, without end . . . Just as -we catch up, they're years ahead. .. . They leave us no chance . . . They've never left us a chance. ..." Hiseyes were moving restlessly; he glanced at the window, but looked hastilyaway: he did not want to see the white obelisk in the distance. "We'rethrough with them. We've won. This is our age. Our world. We're going to havesecurity—for the first time in centuries—for the first time since thebeginning of the industrial revolution!"

"Well, this, I guess," said Fred Kinnan, "is the anti-industrialrevolution."

"That's a damn funny thing for you to say!" snapped Wesley Mouch. "Wecan't be permitted to say that to the public."

"Don't worry, brother. I won't say it to the public."

"It's a total fallacy," said Dr. Ferris. "It's a statement prompted byignorance. Every expert has conceded long ago that a planned economy achievesthe maximum of productive efficiency and that centralization leads to super-industrialization. "

"Centralization destroys the blight of monopoly," said Boyle.

"How's that again?" drawled Kinnan.

Boyle did not catch the tone of mockery, and answered earnestly, "Itdestroys the blight of monopoly. It leads to the democratization of industry.It makes everything available to everybody. Now, for instance, at a time likethis, when there's such a desperate shortage of iron ore, is there any sensein my wasting money, labor and national resources on making old-fashionedsteel, when there exists a much better metal that I could be making? A metalthat everybody wants, but nobody can get. Now is that good economics or soundsocial efficiency or democratic justice? Why shouldn't I be allowed tomanufacture that metal and why shouldn't the people get it when they need it?

Just because of the private monopoly of one selfish individual? Should wesacrifice our rights to his personal interests?"

"Skip it, brother," said Fred Kinnan. "I've read it all in the samenewspapers you did."

"I don't like your attitude," said Boyle, in a sudden tone ofrighteousness, with a look which, in a barroom, would have signified aprelude to a fist fight. He sat up straight, buttressed by the columns ofparagraphs on yellow-tinged paper, which he was seeing in his mind: "At atime of crucial public need, are we to waste social effort on the manufactureof obsolete products? Are we to let the many remain in want while the fewwithhold from us the better products and methods available? Are we to bestopped by the superstition of patent rights?"

"Is it not obvious that private industry is unable to cope with thepresent economic crisis? How long, for instance, are we going to put up withthe disgraceful shortage of Rearden Metal? There is a crying public demandfor it, which Rearden has failed to supply."

"When are we going to put an end to economic injustice and specialprivileges? Why should Rearden be the only one permitted to manufactureRearden Metal?"

"I don't like your attitude," said Orren Boyle. "So long as we respect therights of the workers, we'll want you to respect the rights of theindustrialists."

"Which rights of which industrialists?" drawled Kinnan.

"I'm inclined to think," said Dr. Ferris hastily, "that Point Two,perhaps, is the most essential one of all at present. We must put an end tothat peculiar business of industrialists retiring and vanishing. We must stopthem. It's playing havoc with our entire economy."

"Why are they doing it?" asked Taggart nervously. "Where are they allgoing?"

"Nobody knows," said Dr. Ferris. "We've been unable to find anyinformation or explanation. But it must be stopped. In times of crisis,economic service to the nation is just as much of a duty as military service.Anyone who abandons it should be regarded as a deserter. I have recommendedthat we introduce the death penalty for those men, but Wesley wouldn't agreeto it."

"Take it easy, boy," said Fred Kinnan in an odd, slow voice. He satsuddenly and perfectly still, his arms crossed, looking at Ferris in a mannerthat made it suddenly real to the room that Ferris had proposed murder."Don't let me hear you talk about any death penalties in industry."

Dr. Ferris shrugged.

"We don't have to go to extremes," said Mouch hastily. "We don't want tofrighten people. We want to have them on our side. Our top problem is, willthey . . . will they accept it at all?"

"They will," said Dr. Ferris.

"I'm a little worried," said Eugene Lawson, "about Points Three and Four.Taking over the patents is fine. Nobody's going to defend industrialists. ButI'm worried about taking over the copyrights. That's going to antagonize theintellectuals. It's dangerous. It's a spiritual issue. Doesn't Point Fourmean that no new books are to be written or published from now on?"

"Yes," said Mouch, "it does. But we can't make an exception for the book-publishing business. It's an industry like any other. When we say 'no newproducts, ' it's got to mean 'no new products.' "

"But this is a matter of the spirit," said Lawson; his voice had a tone,not of rational respect, but of superstitious awe.

"We're not interfering with anybody's spirit. But when you print a book onpaper, it becomes a material commodity—and if we grant an exception to onecommodity, we won't be able to hold the others in line and we won't be ableto make anything stick."

"Yes, that's true. But-"

"Don't be a chump, Gene," said Dr. Ferris. "You don't want somerecalcitrant hacks to come out with treatises that will wreck our entireprogram, do you? If you breathe the word 'censorship' now, they'll all screambloody murder. They're not ready for it—as yet. But if you leave the spiritalone and make it a simple material issue—not a matter of ideas, but just amatter of paper, ink and printing presses—

you accomplish your purpose much more smoothly. You'll make sure thatnothing dangerous gets printed or heard—and nobody is going to fight over amaterial issue."

"Yes, but . . . but I don't think the writers will like it."

"Are you sure?" asked Wesley Mouch, with a glance that was almost a smile,"Don't forget that under Point Five, the publishers will have to publish asmany books as they did in the Basic Year. Since there will be no new ones,they will have to reprint—and the public will have to buy—some of the oldones. There are many very worthy books that have never had a fair chance."

"Oh," said Lawson; he remembered that he had seen Mouch lunching withBalph Eubank two weeks ago. Then he shook his head and frowned. "Still, I'mworried. The intellectuals are our friends. We don't want to lose them. Theycan make an awful lot of trouble."

"They won't," said Fred Kinnan. "Your kind of intellectuals are the firstto scream when it's safe—and the first to shut their traps at the first sign

of danger. They spend years spitting at the man who feeds them—and they lickthe hand of the man who slaps their drooling faces. Didn't they deliver everycountry of Europe, one after another, to committees of goons, just like thisone here? Didn't they scream their heads off to shut out every burglar alarmand to break every padlock open for the goons? Have you heard a peep out ofthem since? Didn't they scream that they were the friends of labor? Do youhear them raising their voices about the chain gangs, the slave camps, thefourteen-hour workday and the mortality from scurvy in the People's States ofEurope? No, but you do hear them telling the whip-beaten wretches thatstarvation is prosperity, that slavery is freedom, that torture chambers arcbrother-love and that if the wretches don't understand it, then it's theirown fault that they suffer, and it's the mangled corpses in the jail cellarswho're to blame for all their troubles, not the benevolent leaders!Intellectuals? You might have to worry about any other breed of men, but notabout the modern intellectuals: they'll swallow anything. I don't feel sosafe about the lousiest wharf rat in the longshoremen's union: he's liable toremember suddenly that he is a man—and then I won't be able to keep him inline. But the intellectuals? That's the one thing they've forgotten long ago.I guess it's the one thing that all their education was aimed to make themforget. Do anything you please to the intellectuals. They'll take it."

"For once," said Dr. Ferns, "I agree with Mr. Kinnan. I agree with hisfacts, if not with his feelings. You don't have to worry about theintellectuals, Wesley. Just put a-few of them on the government payroll andsend them out to preach precisely the sort of thing Mr.

Kinnan mentioned: that the blame rests on the victims. Give themmoderately comfortable salaries and extremely loud titles—and they'll forgettheir copyrights and do a better job for you than whole squads of enforcementofficers. "

"Yes," said Mouch. "I know."

"The danger that I'm worried about will come from a different quarter,"said Dr. Ferris thoughtfully. "You might run into quite a bit of trouble onthat 'voluntary Gift Certificatel business, Wesley."

"I know," said Mouch glumly. "That's the point I wanted Thompson to helpus out on. But I guess he can't. We don't actually have the legal power toseize the patents. Oh, there's plenty of clauses in dozens of laws that canbe stretched to cover it—almost, but not quite. Any tycoon who'd want to makea test case would have a very good chance to beat us. And we have to preservea semblance of legality—or the populace won't take it."

"Precisely," said Dr. Ferris. "It's extremely important to get thosepatents turned over to us voluntarily. Even if we had a law permittingoutright nationalization, it would be much better to get them as a gift, Wewant to leave to people the illusion that they're still preserving theirprivate property rights. And most of them will play along. They'll sign theGift Certificates. Just raise a lot of noise about its being a patriotic dutyand that anyone who refuses is a prince of greed, and they'll sign. But—" Hestopped.

"I know," said Mouch; he was growing visibly more nervous. "There will be,I think, a few old-fashioned bastards here and there who'll refuse to sign-but they won't be prominent enough to make a noise, nobody will hear aboutit, their own communities and friends will turn against them for their beingselfish, so it won't give us any trouble.

We'll just take the patents over, anyway—and those guys won't have thenerve or the money to start a test case. But—" He stopped.

James Taggart leaned back in his chair, watching them; he was beginning toenjoy the conversation.

"Yes," said Dr. Ferris, "I'm thinking of it, too. I'm thinking of acertain' tycoon who is in a position to blast us to pieces. Whether we'll

recover the pieces or not, is hard to tell. God knows what is liable tohappen at a hysterical time like the present and in a situation as delicateas this. Anything can throw everything off balance. Blow up the whole works.And if there's anyone who wants to do it, he does. He does and can. He knowsthe real issue, he knows the things which must not be said—and he is notafraid to say them. He knows the one dangerous, fatally dangerous weapon. Heis our deadliest adversary.""Who?" asked Lawson.

Dr. Ferris hesitated, shrugged and answered, "The guiltless man."

Lawson stared blankly. "What do you mean and whom are you talking about?"

James Taggart smiled.

"I mean that there is no way to disarm any man," said Dr. Ferris, "exceptthrough guilt. Through that which he himself has accepted as guilt. If a manhas ever stolen a dime, you can impose on him the punishment intended for abank robber and he will take it. He'll bear any form of misery, he'll feelthat he deserves no better. If there's not enough guilt in the world, we mustcreate it. If we teach a man that it's evil to look at spring flowers and hebelieves us and then does it —we'll be able to do whatever we please withhim. He won't defend himself. He won't feel he's worth it. He won't fight.But save us from the man who lives up to his own- standards. Save us from theman of clean conscience. He's the man who'll beat us."

"Are you talking about Henry Rearden?" asked Taggart, his voice peculiarlyclear.

The one name they had not wanted to pronounce struck them into aninstant's silence.

"What if I were?" asked Dr. Ferris cautiously.

"Oh, nothing," said Taggart. "Only, if you were, I would tell you that Ican deliver Henry Rearden. He'll sign."

By the rules of their unspoken language, they all knew—from the tone ofhis voice—that he was not bluffing.

"God, Jim! No!" gasped Wesley Mouch.

"Yes," said Taggart. "I was stunned, too, when I learned—what I learned. Ididn't expect that. Anything but that."

"I am glad to hear it," said Mouch cautiously. "It's a constructive pieceof information. It might be very valuable indeed."

"Valuable—yes," said Taggart pleasantly. "When do you plan to put thedirective into effect?"

"Oh, we have to move fast. We don't want any news of it to leak out. Iexpect you all to keep this most strictly confidential. I'd say that we'll beready to spring it on them in a couple of weeks."

"Don't you think that it would be advisable—before all prices are frozen—to adjust the matter of the railroad rates? I was thinking of a raise. Asmall but most essentially needed raise."

"We'll discuss it, you and I," said Mouch amiably. "It might be arranged."He turned to the others; Boyle's face was sagging. "There are many detailsstill to be worked out, but I'm sure that our program won't encounter anymajor difficulties." He was assuming the tone and manner of a public address;he sounded brisk and almost cheerful. "Rough spots are to be expected. If onething doesn't work, we'll try another.

Trial-and-error is the only pragmatic rule of action. We'll just keep ontrying. If any hardships come up, remember that it's only temporary.

Only for the duration of the national emergency."

"Say, " asked Kinnan, "how is the emergency to end if everything is tostand still?"

"Don't be theoretical," said Mouch impatiently. "We've got to deal withthe situation of the moment. Don't bother about minor details, so long as the

broad outlines of our policy are clear. We'll have the power. We'll be ableto solve any problem and answer any question."

Fred Kinnan chuckled. "Who is John Gait?"

"Don't say that!" cried Taggart.

"I have a question to ask about Point Seven," said Kinnan. "It says thatal! wages, prices, salaries, dividends, profits and so forth will be frozenon the date of the directive. Taxes, too?"

"Oh no!" cried Mouch. "How can we tell what funds we'll need in thefuture?" Kinnan seemed to be smiling. "Well?" snapped Mouch.

"What about it?"

"Nothing," said Kinnan. "I just asked."

Mouch leaned back in his chair. "I must say to all of you that Iappreciate your coming here and giving us the benefit of your opinions. Ithas been very helpful." He leaned forward to look at his desk calendar andsat over it for a moment, toying with his pencil, Then the pencil came down,struck a date and drew a circle around it. "Directive 10-289 will go intoeffect on the morning of May first."

All nodded approval. None looked at his neighbor.

James Taggart rose, walked to the window and pulled the blind down overthe white obelisk.

In the first moment of awakening, Dagny was astonished to find herselflooking at the spires of unfamiliar buildings against a glowing, pale bluesky. Then she saw the twisted seam of the thin stocking on her own leg, shefelt a wrench of discomfort in the muscles of her waistline, and she realizedthat she was lying on the couch in her office, with the clock on her desksaying 6:15 and the first rays of the sun giving silver edges to thesilhouettes of the skyscrapers beyond the window. The last thing sheremembered was that she had dropped down on the couch, intending to rest forten minutes, when the window was black and the clock stood at 3:30.

She twisted herself to her feet, feeling an enormous exhaustion. Thelighted lamp on the desk looked futile in the glow of the morning, over thepiles of paper which were her cheerless, unfinished task. She tried not tothink of the work for a few minutes longer, while she dragged herself pastthe desk to her washroom and let handfuls of cold water run over her face.

The exhaustion was gone by the time she stepped back into the office. Nomatter what night preceded it, she had never known a morning when she did notfeel the rise of a quiet excitement that became a tightening energy in herbody and a hunger for action in her mind—

because this was the beginning of day and it was a day of her life.

She looked down at the city. The streets were still empty, it made themlook wider, and in the luminous cleanliness of the spring air they seemed tobe waiting for the promise of all the greatness that would take form in theactivity about to pour through them. The calendar in the distance said: May1.

She sat down at her desk, smiling in defiance at the distastefulness ofher job. She hated the reports that she had to finish reading, but it was herjob, it was her railroad, it was morning. She lighted a cigarette, thinkingthat she would finish this task before breakfast; she turned off the lamp andpulled the papers forward.

There were reports from the general managers of the four Regions of theTaggart system, their pages a typewritten cry of despair over the breakdownsof equipment. There was a report about a wreck on the main line near Winston,Colorado. There was the new budget of the Operating Department, the revisedbudget based on the raise in rates which Jim had obtained last week. Shetried to choke the exasperation of hopelessness as she went slowly over thebudget's figures: all those calculations had been made on the assumption thatthe volume of freight would remain unchanged and that the raise would bring

them added revenue by the end of the year; she knew that the freight tonnagewould go on shrinking, that the raise would make little difference, that bythe end of this year their losses would be greater than ever.

When she looked up from the pages, she saw with a small jolt ofastonishment that the clock said 9:25. She had been dimly aware of the usualsound of movement and voices in the anteroom of her office, as her staff hadarrived to begin their day; she wondered why nobody had entered her officeand why her telephone had remained silent; as a daily rule, there should havebeen a rush of business by this hour. She glanced at her calendar; there wasa note that the McNeil Car Foundry of Chicago was to phone her at nine A.M.in regard to the new freight cars which Taggart Transcontinental had beenexpecting for six months.

She flicked the switch of the interoffice communicator to call hersecretary. The girl's voice answered with a startled little gasp: "MissTaggart! Are you here, in your office?"

"I slept here last night, again. Didn't intend to, but did. Was there acall for me from the McNeil Car Foundry?"

"No, Miss Taggart."

"Put them through to me immediately, when they call,""Yes, Miss Taggart."

Switching the communicator off, she wondered whether she imagined it orwhether there had been something strange in the girl's voice: it had soundedunnaturally tense.

She felt the faint light-headedness of hunger and thought that she shouldgo down to get a cup of coffee, but there was still the report of the chiefengineer to finish, so she lighted one more cigarette.

The chief engineer was out on the road, supervising the reconstruction ofthe main track with the Rearden Metal rail taken from the corpse of the JohnGait Line; she had chosen the sections most urgently in need of repair.Opening his report, she read—with a shock of incredulous anger—that he hadstopped work in the mountain section of Winston, Colorado. He recommended achange of plans: he suggested that the rail intended for Winston be used,instead, to repair the track of their Washington-to-Miami branch. He gave hisreasons: a derailment had occurred on that branch last week, and Mr. TinkyHolloway of Washington, traveling with a party of friends, had been delayedfor three hours; it had been reported to the chief engineer that Mr. Hollowayhad expressed extreme displeasure. Although, from a purely technologicalviewpoint—said the chief engineer's report—the rail of the Miami branch wasin better condition than that of the Winston section, one had to remember,from a sociological viewpoint, that the Miami branch carried a much moreimportant class of passenger traffic; therefore, the chief engineer suggestedthat Winston could be kept waiting a little longer, and recommended thesacrifice of an obscure section of mountain trackage for the sake of a branchwhere "Taggart Transcontinental could not afford to create an unfavorableimpression."

She read, slashing furious pencil marks on the margins of the pages,thinking that her first duty of the day, ahead of any other, was to stop thisparticular piece of insanity.

The telephone rang.

"Yes?" she asked, snatching the receiver. "McNeil Car Foundry?"

"No," said the voice of her secretary. "Senor Francisco d'Anconia."

She looked at the phone's mouthpiece for the instant of a brief shock."All right. Put him on."

The next voice she heard was Francisco's. "I see that you're in youroffice just the same," he said; his voice was mocking, harsh and tense.

"Where did you expect me to be?"

"How do you like the new suspension?"

"What suspension?"

"The moratorium on brains."

"What are you talking about?"

"Haven't you seen today's newspapers?"

"No. "

There was a pause; then his voice came slowly, changed and grave: "Bettertake a look at them, Dagny.""All right.""I'll call you later."

She hung up and pressed the switch of the communicator on her desk. "Getme a newspaper," she said to her secretary.

"Yes, Miss Taggart," the secretary's voice answered grimly.

It was Eddie Willers who came in and put the newspaper down on her desk.The meaning of the look on his face' was the same as the tone she had caughtin Francisco's voice: the advance notice of some inconceivable disaster.

"None of us wanted to be first to tell you, " he said very quietly andwalked out.

When she rose from her desk, a few moments later, she felt that she hadfull control of her body and that she was not aware of her body's existence.She felt lifted to her feet and it seemed to her that she stood straight, nottouching the ground. There was an abnormal clarity about every object in theroom, yet she was seeing nothing around her, but she knew that she would beable to see the thread of a cobweb if her purpose required it, just as shewould be able to walk with a somnambulist's assurance along the edge of aroof. She could not know that she was looking at the room with the eyes of aperson who had lost the capacity and the concept of doubt, and what remainedto her was the simplicity of a single perception and of a single goal. Shedid not know that the thing which seemed so violent, yet felt like such astill, unfamiliar calm within her, was the power of full certainty—and thatthe anger shaking her body, the anger which made her ready, with the samepassionate indifference, either to kill or to die, was her love of rectitude,the only love to which all the years of her life had been given.

Holding the newspaper in her hand, she walked out of her office and ontoward the hall. She knew, crossing the anteroom, that the faces of her staffwere turned to her, but they seemed to be many years away.

She walked down the hall, moving swiftly but without effort, with the samesensation of knowing that her feet were probably touching the ground but thatshe did not feel it. She did not know how many rooms she crossed to reachJim's office, or whether there had been any people in her way, she knew thedirection to take and the door to pull open to enter unannounced and walktoward his desk.

The newspaper was twisted into a roll by the time she stood before him.She threw it at his face, it struck his cheek and fell down to the carpet.

"There's my resignation, Jim," she said. "I won't work as a slave or as aslave-driver."

She did not hear the sound of his gasp; it came with the sound of the doorclosing after her.

She went back to her office and, crossing the anteroom, signaled Eddie tofollow her inside.

She said, her voice calm and clear, "I have resigned."He nodded silently.

"I don't know as yet what I'll do in the future. I'm going away, to thinkit over and to decide. If you want to follow me, I'll be at the lodge inWoodstock." It was an old hunting cabin in a forest of the BerkshireMountains, which she had inherited from her father and had not visited foryears.

"I want to follow," he whispered, "I want to quit, and . . . and I can't.I can't make myself do it."

"Then will you do me a favor?""Of course."

"Don't communicate with me about the railroad. I don't want to hear it.Don't tell anyone where I am, except Hank Rearden. If he asks, tell him aboutthe cabin and how to get there. But no one else. I don't want to seeanybody."

"AU right."

"Promise?"

"Of course."

"When I decide what's to become of me, I'll let you know."

"Ill wait."

"That's all, Eddie."

He knew that every word was measured and that nothing else could be saidbetween them at this moment. He inclined his head, letting it say the rest,then walked out of the office.

She saw the chief engineer's report still lying open on her desk, andthought that she had to order him at once to resume the work on the Winstonsection, then remembered that it was not her problem any longer. She felt nopain. She knew that the pain would come later and that it would be a tearingagony of pain, and that the numbness of this moment was a rest granted toher, not after, but before, to make her ready to bear it. But it did notmatter. If that is required of me, then I'll bear it—she thought.

She sat down at her desk and telephoned Rearden at his mills inPennsylvania.

"Hello, dearest," he said. He said it simply and clearly, as if he wantedto say it because it was real and right, and he needed to hold on to theconcepts of reality and Tightness.

"Hank, I've quit."

"I see." He sounded as if he had expected it.

"Nobody came to get me, no destroyer, perhaps there never was anydestroyer, after all. I don't know what I'll do next, but I have to get away,so that I won't have to see any of them for a while. Then I'll decide. I knowthat you can't go with me right now."

"No. I have two weeks in which they expect me to sign their GiftCertificate. I want to be right here when the two weeks expire."

"Do you need me—for the two weeks?"

"No. It's worse for you than for me. You have no way to fight them. Ihave. I think I'm glad they did it. It's clear and final. Don't worry aboutme. Rest. Rest from all of it, first."

"Yes."

"Where are you going?"

"To the country. To a cabin I own in the Berkshires. If you want to seeme, Eddie Willers will tell you the way to get there. I'll be back in twoweeks."

"Will you do me a favor?"

"Yes."

"Don't come back until I come for you.""But I want to be here, when it happens.""Leave that up to me."

"Whatever they do to you, I want it done to me also."

"Leave it up to me. Dearest, don't you understand? I think that what Iwant most right now is what you want: not to see any of them. But I have tostay here for a while. So it will help me if I know that you, at least, areout of their reach. I want to keep one clean point in my mind, to lean

against. It will be only a short while—and then I'll come for you. Do youunderstand?"

"Yes, my darling. So long."

It was weightlessly easy to walk out of her office and down the stretchinghalls of Taggart Transcontinental. She walked, looking ahead, her stepsadvancing with the unbroken, unhurried rhythm of finality.

Her face was held level and it had a look of astonishment, of acceptance,of repose.

She walked across the concourse of the Terminal. She saw the statue ofNathaniel Taggart. But she felt no pain from it and no reproach, only therising fullness of her love, only the feeling that she was going to join him,not in death, but in that which had been his life.

The first man to quit at Rearden Steel was Tom Colby, rolling millforeman, head of the Rearden Steel Workers Union. For ten years, he had heardhimself denounced throughout the country, because his was a "company union"and because he had never engaged in a violent conflict with the management.This was true: no conflict had ever been necessary; Rearden paid a higherwage scale than any union scale in the country, for which he demanded—andgot—the best labor force to be found anywhere.

When Tom Colby told him that he was quitting, Rearden nodded, withoutcomment or questions.

"I won't work under these conditions, myself," Colby added quietly, "and Iwon't help, to keep the men working. They trust me. I won't be the Judas goatleading them to the stockyards."

"What are you going to do for a living?" asked Rearden.

"I've saved enough to last me for about a year."

"And after that?"

Colby shrugged.

Rearden thought of the boy with the angry eyes, who mined coal at night asa criminal. He thought of all the dark roads, the alleys, the back yards ofthe country, where the best of the country's men would now exchange theirservices in jungle barter, in chance jobs, in unrecorded transactions. Hethought of the end of that road.

Tom Colby seemed to know what he was thinking. "You're on your way to endup right alongside of me, Mr. Rearden," he said. "Are you going to sign yourbrains over to them?"

"No. "

"And after that?"Rearden shrugged.

Colby's eyes watched him for a moment, pale, shrewd eyes in a furnace-tanned face with soot-engraved wrinkles. "They've been telling us for yearsthat it's you against me, Mr. Rearden. But it isn't. It's Orren Boyle andFred Kinnan against you and me."

"I know it."

The Wet Nurse had never entered Rearden's office, as if sensing that thatwas a place he had no right to enter. He always waited to catch a glimpse ofRearden outside. The directive had attached him to his job, as the mills'official watchdog of over-or-under-production. He stopped Rearden, a few dayslater, in an alley between the rows of open-hearth furnaces. There was an oddlook of fierceness on the boy's face.

"Mr. Rearden," he said, "I wanted to tell you that if you want to pour tentimes the quota of Rearden Metal or steel or pig iron or anything, andbootleg it all over the place to anybody at any price—I wanted to tell you togo ahead. Ill fix it up. I'll juggle the books, I'll fake the reports, I'llget phony witnesses, I'll forge affidavits, I'll commit perjury—so you don'thave to worry, there won't be any trouble!"

"Now why do you want to do that?" asked Rearden, smiling, but his smilevanished when he heard the boy answer earnestly: "Because I want, for once,to do something moral."

"That's not the way to be moral—" Rearden started, and stopped abruptly,realizing that- it was the way, the only way left, realizing through how manytwists of intellectual corruption upon corruption this boy had to struggletoward his momentous discovery.

"I guess that's not the word," the boy said sheepishly. "I know it's astuffy, old-fashioned word. That's not what I meant. I meant—" It was asudden, desperate cry of incredulous anger: "Mr. Rearden, they have no rightto do it!"

"What?"

"Take Rearden Metal away from you."

Rearden smiled and, prompted by a desperate pity, said, "Forget it, Non-Absolute. There are no rights."

"I know there aren't. But I mean . . . what I mean is that they can't doit. "

"Why not?" He could not help smiling.

"Mr. Rearden, don't sign the Gift Certificate! Don't sign it, onprinciple."

"I won't sign it. But there aren't any principles."

"I know there aren't." He was reciting it in full earnestness, with thehonesty of a conscientious student: "I know that everything is relative andthat nobody can know anything and that reason is an illusion and that thereisn't any reality. But I'm just talking about Rearden Metal.

Don't sign, Mr. Rearden. Morals or no morals, principles or no principles,just don't sign it—because it isn't right!"

No one else mentioned the directive in Rearden's presence. Silence was thenew aspect about the mills. The men did not speak to him when he appeared inthe workshops, and he noticed that they did not speak to one another. Thepersonnel office received no formal resignations. But every other morning,one or two men failed to appear and never appeared again. Inquiries at theirhomes found the homes abandoned and the men gone. The personnel office didnot report these desertions, as the directive required; instead, Reardenbegan to see unfamiliar faces among the workers, the drawn, beaten faces ofthe long unemployed, and heard them addressed by the names of the men who hadquit. He asked no questions.

There was silence throughout the country. He did not know how manyindustrialists had retired and vanished on May I and 2, leaving their plantsto be seized. He counted ten among his own customers, including McNeil of theMcNeil Car Foundry in Chicago. He had no way of learning about the others; noreports appeared in the newspapers.

The front pages of the newspapers were suddenly full of stories aboutspring floods, traffic accidents, school picnics and golden-weddinganniversaries.

There was silence in his own home. Lillian had departed on a vacation tripto Florida, in mid-April; it had astonished him, as an inexplicable whim; itwas the first trip she had taken alone since their marriage. Philip avoidedhim, with a look of panic. His mother stared at Rearden in reproachfulbewilderment; she said nothing, but she kept bursting into tears in hispresence, her manner suggesting that her tears were the most important aspectto consider in whatever disaster it was that she sensed approaching.

On the morning of May 15, he sat at the desk in his office, above thespread of the mills, and watched the colors of the smoke rising to the clear,blue sky. There were spurts of transparent smoke, like waves of heat,invisible but for the structures that shivered behind them; there werestreaks of red smoke, and sluggish columns of yellow, and light, floating

spirals of blue—and the thick, tight, swiftly pouring coils that looked liketwisted bolts of satin tinged a mother-of-pearl pink by the summer sun.

The buzzer rang on his desk, and Miss Ives voice said, "Dr. Floyd Ferristo see you, without appointment, Mr. Rearden." In spite of its rigidformality, her tone conveyed the question: Shall I throw him out?

There was a faint movement of astonishment in Rearden's face, barely abovethe line of indifference: he had not expected that particular emissary. Heanswered evenly, "Ask him to come in."

Dr. Ferris did not smile as he walked toward Rearden's desk; he merelywore a look suggesting that Rearden knew full well that he had good reason tosmile and so he would abstain from the obvious.

He sat down in front of the desk, not waiting for an invitation; hecarried a briefcase, which he placed across his knees; he acted as if wordswere superfluous, since his reappearance in this office had made everythingclear.

Rearden sat watching him in patient silence.

"Since the deadline for the signing of the national Gift Certificatesexpires tonight at midnight," said Dr. Ferris, in the tone of a salesmanextending a special courtesy to a customer, "I have come to obtain yoursignature, Mr. Rearden."

He paused, with an air of suggesting that the formula now called for ananswer.

"Go on," said Rearden. "I am listening."

"Yes, I suppose I should explain," said Dr. Ferris, "that we wish to getyour signature early in the day in order to announce the fact on a nationalnews broadcast. Although the gift program has gone through quite smoothly,there are still a few stubborn individualists left, who have failed to sign-small fry, really, whose patents are of no crucial value, but we cannot letthem remain unbound, as a matter of principle, you understand. They are, webelieve, waiting to follow your lead. You have a great popular following, Mr.Rearden, much greater than you suspected or knew how to use. Therefore, theannouncement that you have signed will remove the last hopes of resistanceand, by midnight, will bring in the last signatures, thus completing theprogram on schedule."

Rearden knew that of all possible speeches, this was the last Dr.

Ferris would make if any doubt of his surrender remained in the man'smind.

"Go on," said Rearden evenly. "You haven't finished."

"You know—as you have demonstrated at your trial—how important it is, andwhy, that we obtain all that property with the voluntary consent of thevictims." Dr. Ferris opened his briefcase. "Here is the Gift Certificate, Mr.Rearden. We have filled it out and all you have to do is to sign your name atthe bottom."

The piece of paper, which he placed in front of Rearden, looked like asmall college diploma, with the text printed in old-fashioned script and theparticulars inserted by typewriter. The thing stated that he, Henry Rearden,hereby transferred to the nation all rights to the metal alloy now known as"Rearden Metal," which would henceforth be manufactured by all who sodesired, and which would bear the name of "Miracle Metal," chosen by therepresentatives of the people.

Glancing at the paper, Rearden wondered whether it was a deliberatemockery of decency, or so low an estimate of their victims' intelligence,that had made the designers of this paper print the text across a faintdrawing of the Statue of Liberty.

His eyes moved slowly to Dr. Ferris' face. "You would not have come here,"he said, "unless you had some extraordinary kind of blackjack to use on me.What is it?"

"Of course," said Dr. Ferris. "I would expect you to understand that. Thatis why no lengthy explanations are necessary." He opened his briefcase. "Doyou wish to see my blackjack? I have brought a few samples."

In the manner of a cardsharp whisking out a long fan of cards with onesnap of the hand, he spread before Rearden a line of glossy photographicprints. They were photostats of hotel and auto court registers, bearing inRearden's handwriting the names of Mr. and Mrs. J.

Smith.

"You know, of course," said Dr. Ferris softly, "but you might wish to seewhether we know it, that Mrs. J. Smith is Miss Dagny Taggart."

He found nothing to observe in Rearden's face. Rearden had not moved tobend over the prints, but sat looking down at them with grave attentiveness,as if, from the perspective of distance, he were discovering something aboutthem which he had not known.

"We have a great deal of additional evidence," said Dr. Ferris, and tosseddown on the desk a photostat of the jeweler's bill for the ruby pendant. "Youwouldn't care to see the sworn statements of apartment house doormen andnight clerks—they contain nothing that would be new to you, except the numberof witnesses who know where you spent your nights in New York, for about thelast two years. You mustn't blame those people too much. It's an interestingcharacteristic of epochs such as ours that people begin to be afraid ofsaying the things they want to say—and afraid, when questioned, to remainsilent about things they'd prefer never to utter. That is to be expected. Butyou would be astonished if you knew who gave us the original tip."

"I know it," said Rearden; his voice conveyed no reaction. The trip toFlorida was not inexplicable to him any longer.

"There is nothing in this blackjack of mine that can harm you personally,"said Dr. Ferris, "We knew that no form of personal injury would ever make yougive in. Therefore, I am telling you frankly that this will not hurt you atall. It will only hurt Miss Taggart"

Rearden was looking straight at him now, but Dr. Ferris wondered why itseemed to him that the calm, closed face was moving away into a greater andgreater distance.

"If this affair of yours is spread from one end of the country to theother," said Dr, Ferris, "by such experts in the art of smearing as BertramScudder, it will do no actual damage to your reputation.

Beyond a few glances of curiosity and a few raised eyebrows in a few ofthe stuffier drawing rooms, you will get off quite easily. Affairs of thissort are expected of a man. In fact, it will enhance your reputation.

It will give you an aura of romantic glamour among the women and, amongthe men, it will give you a certain kind of prestige, in the nature of envyfor an unusual conquest. But what it will do to Miss Taggart—with herspotless name, her reputation for being above scandal, her peculiar positionof a woman in a strictly masculine business—

what it will do to her, what she will see in the eyes of everyone shemeets, what she will hear from every man she deals with—I will leave that upto your own mind to imagine. And to consider."

Rearden felt nothing but a great stillness and a great clarity. It was asif some voice were telling him sternly: This is the time—the scene islighted—now look. And standing naked in the great light, he was lookingquietly, solemnly, stripped of fear, of pain, of hope, with nothing left tohim but the desire to know.

Dr. Ferris was astonished to hear him say slowly, in the dispassionatetone of an abstract statement that did not seem to be addressed to hislistener, "But all your calculations rest on the fact that Miss Taggart is avirtuous woman, not the slut you're going to call her."

"Yes, of course," said Dr. Ferris.

"And that this means much more to me than a casual affair.""Of course."

"If she and I were the kind of scum you're going to make us appear, yourblackjack wouldn't work.""No, it wouldn't."

"If our relationship were the depravity you're going to proclaim it to be,you'd have no way to harm us.""No. "

"We'd be outside your power.""Actually-yes."

It was not to Dr. Ferris that Rearden was speaking. He was seeing a longline of men stretched through the centuries from Plato onward, whose heir andfinal product was an incompetent little professor with the appearance of agigolo and the soul of a thug.

"I offered you, once, a chance to join us," said Dr. Ferris. "You refused.Now you can see the consequences. How a man of your intelligence thought thathe could win by playing it straight, I can't imagine."

"But if I had joined you," said Rearden with the same detachment, as if hewere not speaking about himself, "what would I have found worth looting fromOrren Boyle?"

"Oh hell, there's always enough suckers to expropriate in the world!"

"Such as Miss Taggart? As Ken Danagger? As Ellis Wyatt? As I?"

"Such as any man who wants to be impractical."

"You mean that it is not practical to live on earth, is it?"

He did not know whether Dr. Ferris answered him. He was not listening anylonger. He was seeing the pendulous face of Orren Boyle with the small slitsof pig's eyes, the doughy face of Mr. Mowen with the eyes that scurried awayfrom any speaker and any fact—he was seeing them go through the jerky motionsof an ape performing a routine it had learned to copy by muscular habit,performing it in order to manufacture Rearden Metal, with no knowledge and nocapacity to know what had taken place in the experimental laboratory ofRearden Steel through ten years of passionate devotion to an excruciatingeffort. It was proper that they should now call it "Miracle Metal".—a miraclewas the only name they could give to those ten years and to that faculty fromwhich Rearden Metal was born—a miracle was all that the Metal could be intheir eyes, the product of an unknown, unknowable cause, an object in nature,not to be explained, but to be seized, like a stone or a weed, theirs for theseizing—"are we to let the many remain in want while the few withhold from usthe better products and methods available?"

If I had not known that my life depends on my mind and my effort—he wassaying soundlessly to the line of men stretched through the centuries—if Ihad not made it my highest moral purpose to exercise the best of my effortand the fullest capacity of my mind in order to support and expand my life,you would have found nothing to loot from me, nothing to support your ownexistence. It is not my sins that you're using to injure me, but my virtues—my virtues by your own acknowledgment, since your own life depends on them,since you need them, since you do not seek to destroy my achievement but toseize it.

He remembered the voice of the gigolo of science saying to him: "We'reafter power and we mean it. You fellows were pikers, but we know the realtrick." We were not after power—he said to the gigolo's ancestors-in-spirit—and we did not live by means of that which we condemned. We regardedproductive ability as virtue—and we let the degree of his virtue be themeasure of a man's reward. We drew no advantage from the things we regardedas evil—we did not require the existence of bank robbers in order to operateour banks, or of burglars in order to provide for our homes, or of murderersin order to protect our lives. But you need the products of a man's ability—

yet you proclaim that productive ability is a selfish evil and you turn thedegree of a man's productiveness into the measure of his loss. We lived bythat which we held to be good and punished that which we held to be evil. Youlive by that which you denounce as evil and punish that which you know to begood.

He remembered the formula of the punishment that Lillian had sought toimpose on him, the formula he had considered too monstrous to believe—and hesaw it now in its full application, as a system of thought, as a way of lifeand on a world scale. There it was: the punishment that required the victim'sown virtue as the fuel to make it work—his invention of Rearden Metal beingused as the cause of his expropriation—Dagny's honor and the depth of theirfeeling for each other being used as a tool of blackmail, a blackmail fromwhich the depraved would be immune—and, in the People's States of Europe,millions of men being held in bondage by means of their desire to live, bymeans of their energy drained in forced labor, by means of their ability tofeed their masters, by means of the hostage system, of their love for theirchildren or wives or friends—by means of love, ability and pleasure as thefodder for threats and the bait for extortion, with love tied to fear,ability to punishment, ambition to confiscation, with blackmail as law, withescape from pain, not quest for pleasure, as the only incentive to effort andthe only reward of achievement—men held enslaved by means of whatever livingpower they possessed and of whatever joy they found in life. Such was thecode that the world had accepted and such was the key to the code: that ithooked man's love of existence to a circuit of torture, so that only the manwho had nothing to offer would have nothing to fear, so that the virtueswhich made life possible and the values which gave it meaning became theagents of its destruction, so that one's best became the tool of one's agony,and man's life on earth became impractical.

"Yours was the code of life, " said the voice of a man whom he could notforget. "What, then, is theirs?"

Why had the world accepted it?—he thought. How had the victims come tosanction a code that pronounced them guilty of the fact of existing? . . .And then the violence of an inner blow became the total stillness of his bodyas he sat looking at a sudden vision: Hadn't he done it also? Hadn't he givenhis sanction to the code of self damnation? Dagny—he thought—and the depth oftheir feeling for each other . . . the blackmail from which the depravedwould be immune . . . hadn't he, too, once called it depravity? Hadn't hebeen first to throw at her all the insults which the human scum was nowthreatening to throw at her in public? Hadn't he accepted as guilt thehighest happiness he had ever found?

"You who won't allow one per cent of impurity into an alloy of metal," theunforgotten voice was saying to him, "what have you allowed into your moralcode?"

"Well, Mr. Rearden?" said the voice of Dr, Ferris. "Do you understand menow? Do we get the Metal or do we make a public showplace out of MissTaggart's bedroom?"

He was not seeing Dr. Ferris. He was seeing—in the violent clarity thatwas like a spotlight tearing every riddle open to him—the day he met Dagnyfor the first time.

It was a few months after she had become Vice-President of TaggartTranscontinental. He had been hearing skeptically, for some time, the rumorsthat the railroad was run by Jim Taggart's sister. That summer, when he grewexasperated at Taggart's delays and contradictions over an order of rail fora new cutoff, an order which Taggart kept placing, altering and withdrawing,somebody told him that if he wished to get any sense or action out of TaggartTranscontinental, he'd better speak to Jim's sister. He telephoned her officeto make an appointment and insisted on having it that same afternoon. Her

secretary told him that Miss Taggart would be at the construction site of thenew cutoff, that afternoon, at Milford Station between New York andPhiladelphia, but would be glad to see him there if he wished. He went to theappointment resentfully; he did not like such businesswomen as he had met,and he felt that railroads were no business for a woman to play with; heexpected a spoiled heiress who used her name and sex as substitute forability, some eyebrow-plucked, over groomed female, like the lady executivesof department stores.

He got off the last car of a long train, far beyond the platform ofMilford Station. There was a clutter of sidings, freight cars, cranes andsteam shovels around him, descending from the main track down the slope of aravine where men were grading the roadbed of the new cutoff. He startedwalking between the sidings toward the station building. Then he stopped.

He saw a girl standing on top of a pile of machinery on a flatcar.

She was looking off at the ravine, her head lifted, strands of disorderedhair stirring in the wind. Her plain gray suit was like a thin coating ofmetal over a slender body against the spread of sun-flooded space and sky.Her posture had the lightness and unself-conscious precision of an arrogantlypure self-confidence. She was watching the work, her glance intent andpurposeful, the glance of competence enjoying its own function. She looked asif this were her place, her moment and her world, she looked as if enjoymentwere her natural state, her face was the living form of an active, livingintelligence., a young girl's face with a woman's mouth, she seemed unawareof her body except as of a taut instrument ready to serve her purpose in anymanner she wished.

Had he asked himself a moment earlier whether he carried in his mind animage of what he wanted a woman to look like, he would have answered that hedid not; yet, seeing her, he knew that this was the image and that it hadbeen for years. But he was not looking at her as at a woman. He had forgottenwhere he was and on what errand, he was held by a child's sensation of joy inthe immediate moment, by the delight of the unexpected and undiscovered, hewas held by the astonishment of realizing how seldom he came upon a sight hetruly liked, liked in complete acceptance and for its own sake, he waslooking up at her with a faint smile, as he would have looked at a statue ora landscape, and what he felt was the sheer pleasure of the sight, the purestesthetic pleasure he had ever experienced.

He saw a switchman going by and he asked, pointing, "Who is that?"

"Dagny Taggart," said the man, walking on.

Rearden felt as if the words struck him inside his throat. He felt thestart of a current that cut his breath for a moment, then went slowly downhis body, carrying in its wake a sense of weight, a drained heaviness thatleft him no capacity but one. He was aware—with an abnormal clarity—of theplace, the woman's name, and everything it implied, but all of it had recededinto some outer ring and had become a pressure that left him alone in thecenter, as the ring's meaning and essence—and his only reality was the desireto have this woman, now, here, on top of the flatcar in the open sun—to haveher before a word was spoken between them, as the first act of their meeting,because it would say everything and because they had earned it long ago.

She turned her head. In the slow curve of the movement, her eyes came tohis and stopped. He felt certain that she saw the nature of his glance, thatshe was held by it, yet did not name it to herself.

Her eyes moved on and he saw her speak to some man who stood beside theflatcar, taking notes.

Two things struck him together: his return to his normal reality, and theshattering impact of guilt. He felt a moment's approach to that which no manmay feel fully and survive: a sense of self-hatred—the more terrible becausesome part of him refused to accept it and made him feel guiltier. It was not

a progression of words, but the instantaneous verdict of an emotion, averdict that told him: This, then, was his nature, this was his depravity—that the shameful desire he had never been able to conquer, came to him inresponse to the only sight of beauty he had found, that it came with aviolence he had not known to be possible, and that the only freedom now leftto him was to hide it and to despise himself, but never to be rid of it solong as he and this woman were alive.

He did not know how long he stood there or what devastation that span oftime left within him. All that he could preserve was the will to decide thatshe must never know it.

He waited until she had descended to the ground and the man with the noteshad departed; then he approached her and said coldly: "Miss Taggart? I amHenry Rearden."

"Oh!" It was just a small break, then he heard the quietly natural "How doyou do, Mr. Rearden."

He knew, not admitting it to himself, that the break came from some faintequivalent of his own feeling: she was glad that a face she had likedbelonged to a man she could admire. When he proceeded to speak to her aboutbusiness, his manner was more harshly abrupt than it had ever been with anyof his masculine customers.

Now, looking from the memory of the girl on the flatcar to the GiftCertificate lying on his desk, he felt as if the two met in a single shock,fusing all the days and doubts he had lived between them, and, by the glareof the explosion, in a moment's vision of a final sum, he saw the answer toall his questions.

He thought: Guilty?—guiltier than I had known, far guiltier than I hadthought, that day—guilty of the evil of damning as guilt that which was mybest. I damned the fact that my mind and body were a unit, and that my bodyresponded to the values of my mind. I damned the fact that joy is the core ofexistence, the motive power of every living being, that it is the need ofone's body as it is the goal of one's spirit, that my body was not a weightof inanimate muscles, but an instrument able to give me an experience ofsuperlative joy to unite my flesh and my spirit. That capacity, which Idamned as shameful, had left me indifferent to sluts, but gave me my onedesire in answer to a woman's greatness. That desire, which I damned asobscene, did not come from the sight of her body, but from the knowledge thatthe lovely form I saw, did express the spirit I was seeing—

it was not her body that I wanted, but her person—it was not the girl ingray that I had to possess, but the woman who ran a railroad.

But I damned my body's capacity to express what I felt, I damned, as anaffront to her, the highest tribute I could give her—just as they damn myability to translate the work of my mind into Rearden Metal, just as theydamn me for the power to transform matter to serve my needs. I accepted theircode and believed, as they taught me, that the values of one's spirit mustremain as an impotent longing, unexpressed in action, untranslated intoreality, while the life of one's body must be lived in misery, as asenseless, degrading performance, and those who attempt to enjoy it must bebranded as inferior animals.

I broke their code, but I fell into the trap they intended, the trap of acode devised to be broken. I took no pride in my rebellion, I took it asguilt, I did not damn them, I damned myself, I did not damn their code, Idamned existence—and I hid my happiness as a shameful secret. I should havelived it openly, as of our right—or made her my wife, as in truth she was.But I branded my happiness as evil and made her bear it as a disgrace. Whatthey want to do to her now, I did it first. I made it possible.

I did it—in the name of pity for the most contemptible woman I know. That,too, was their code, and I accepted it. I believed that one person owes a

duty to another with no payment for it in return. I believed that it was myduty to love a woman who gave me nothing, who betrayed everything I livedfor, who demanded her happiness at the price of mine. I believed that love issome static gift which, once granted, need no longer be deserved—just as theybelieve that wealth is a static possession which can be seized and heldwithout further effort. I believed that love is a gratuity, not a reward tobe earned—

just as they believe it is their right to demand an unearned wealth.

And just as they believe that their need is a claim on my energy, so Ibelieved that her unhappiness was a claim on my life. For the sake of pity,not justice, T endured ten years of self-torture. I placed pity above my ownconscience, and this is the core of my guilt. My crime was committed when Isaid to her, "By every standard of mine, to maintain our marriage will be avicious fraud. But my standards are not yours.

I do not understand yours, I never have, but I will accept them."

Here they are, lying on my desk, those standards I accepted withoutunderstanding, here is the manner of her love for me, that love which I neverbelieved, but tried to spare. Here is the final product of the unearned. Ithought that it was proper to commit injustice, so long as I would be theonly one to suffer. But nothing can justify injustice.

And this is the punishment for accepting as proper that hideous evil whichis self-immolation. I thought that I would be the only victim.

Instead, I've sacrificed the noblest woman to the vilest. When one acts onpity against justice, it is the good whom one punishes for the sake of theevil; when one saves the guilty from suffering, it is the innocent whom oneforces to suffer. There is no escape from justice, nothing can be unearnedand unpaid for in the universe, neither in matter nor in spirit—and if theguilty do not pay, then the innocent have to pay it.

It was not the cheap little looters of wealth who have beaten me—

it was I. They did not disarm me—I threw away my weapon. This is a battlethat cannot be fought except with clean hands—because the enemy's sole poweris in the sores of one's conscience—and I accepted a code that made me regardthe strength of my hands as a sin and a stain.

"Do we get the Metal, Mr. Rearden?"

He looked from the Gift Certificate on his desk to the memory of the girlon the flatcar. He asked himself whether he could deliver the radiant beinghe had seen in that moment, to the looters of the mind and the thugs of thepress. Could he continue to let the innocent bear punishment? Could he lether take the stand he should have taken?

Could he now defy the enemy's code, when the disgrace would be hers, nothis—when the muck would be thrown at her, not at him—

when she would have to fight, while he'd be spared? Could he let herexistence be turned into a hell he would have no way of sharing?

He sat still, looking up at her, I love you, he said to the girl on theflatcar, silently pronouncing the words that had been the meaning of thatmoment four years ago, feeling the solemn happiness that belonged with thewords, even though this was how he had to say it to her for the first time.

He looked down at the. Gift Certificate. Dagny, he thought, you would notlet me do it if you knew, you will hate me for it if you learn—but I cannotlet you pay my debts. The fault was mine and I will not shift to you thepunishment which is mine to take. Even if I have nothing else now left to me,I have this much: that I see the truth, that I am free of their guilt, that Ican now stand guiltless in my own eyes, that I know I am right, right fullyand for the first time—and that I will remain faithful to the one commandmentof my code which I have never broken: to be a man who pays his own way.

I love you, he said to the girl on the flatcar, feeling as if the light ofthat summer's sun were touching his forehead, as if he, too, were standing

under an open sky over an unobstructed earth, with nothing left to him excepthimself.

"Well, Mr. Rearden? Are you going to sign?'l asked Dr. Ferris.Rearden's eyes moved to him. He had forgotten that Ferris was there, hedid not know whether Ferris had been speaking, arguing or waiting in silence."Oh, that?" said Rearden.

He picked up a pen and with no second glance, with the easy gesture of amillionaire signing a check, he signed his name at the foot of the Statue ofLiberty and pushed the Gift Certificate across the desk.

CHAPTER VIITHE MORATORIUM ON BRAINS

"Where have you been all this time?" Eddie Willers asked the worker in theunderground cafeteria, and added, with a smile that was an appeal, an apologyand a confession of despair, "Oh, I know it's I who've stayed away from herefor weeks." The smile looked like the effort of a crippled child groping fora gesture that he could not perform any longer. "I did come here once, abouttwo weeks ago, but you weren't here that night. I was afraid you'd gone . . .so many people are vanishing without notice. I hear there's hundreds of themroving around the country. The police have been arresting them for leavingtheir jobs—they're called deserters—but there's too many of them and no foodto feed them in jail, so nobody gives a damn any more, one way or another. Ihear the deserters are just wandering about, doing odd jobs or worse—who'sgot any odd jobs to offer these days? . . . It's our best men that we'relosing, the kind who've been with the company for twenty years or more. Whydid they have to chain them to their jobs? Those men never intended to quit-but now they're quitting at the slightest disagreement, just dropping theirtools and walking off, any hour of the day or night, leaving us in all sortsof jams—the men who used to leap out of bed and come running if the railroadneeded them. . . . You should see the kind of human driftwood we're gettingto fill the vacancies. Some of them mean well, but they're scared of theirown shadows. Others are the kind of scum I didn't think existed—they get thejobs and they know that we can't throw them out once they're in, so they makeit clear that they don't intend to work for their pay and never did intend.They're the kind of men who like it—who like the way things are now. Can youimagine that there are human beings who like it? Well, there are. . . . Youknow, I don't think that I really believe it—all that's happening to us thesedays. It's happening all right, but I don't believe it. I keep thinking thatinsanity is a state where a person can't tell what's real.

Well, what's real now is insane—and if I accepted it as real, I'd have tolose my mind, wouldn't I? . . . I go on working and I keep telling myselfthat this is Taggart Transcontinental. I keep waiting for her to come back—for die door to open at any moment and—oh God, I'm not supposed to say that!. . . What? You knew it? You knew that she's gone? . . . They're keeping itsecret. But I guess everybody knows it, only nobody is supposed to say it.They're telling people that she's away on a leave of absence. She's stilllisted as our Vice-President in Charge of Operation. I think Jim and I arethe only ones who know that she has resigned for good. Jim is scared to deaththat his friends in Washington will take it out on him, if it becomes knownthat she's quit. It's supposed to be disastrous for public morale, if anyprominent person quits, and Jim doesn't want them to know that he's got adeserter right in his own family. . . . But that's not all. Jim is scaredthat the stockholders, the employees and whoever we do business with, willlose the last of their confidence in Taggart Transcontinental if they learnthat she's gone. Confidence! You'd think that it wouldn't matter now, sincethere's nothing any of them can do about it. And yet, Jim knows that we haveto preserve some semblance of the greatness that Taggart Transcontinentalonce stood for. And he knows that the last of it went with her. . . . No,they don't know where she is. . . . Yes, I do, but I won't tell them. I'm theonly one who knows. . . . Oh yes, they've been trying to find out. They'vetried to pump me in every way they could think of, but it's no use.

I won't tell anyone. . . . You should see the trained seal that we nowhave in her place—our new Operating Vice-President. Oh sure, we have one—thatis, we have and we haven't. It's like everything they do today—it is and itain't, at the same tune. His name is Clifton Locey—

he's from Jim's personal staff—a bright, progressive young man offortyseven and a friend of Jim's. He's only supposed to be pinch-hitting forher, but he sits in her office and we all know that that's the new OperatingVice-President. He gives the orders—that is, he sees to it that he's nevercaught actually giving an order. He works very hard at making sure that nodecision can ever be pinned down on him, so that he won't be blamed foranything. You see, his purpose is not to operate a railroad, but to hold ajob. He doesn't want to run trains-he wants to please Jim. He doesn't give a damn whether there's a singletrain moving or not, so long as he can make a good impression on Jim and onthe boys in Washington. So far, Mr. Clifton Locey has managed to frame up twomen: a young third assistant, for not relaying an order which Mr. Locey hadnever given—and the freight manager, for issuing an order which Mr. Locey didgive, only the freight manager couldn't prove it. Both men were fired,officially, by ruling of the Unification Board. . . . When things go well—which is never longer than half an hour—Mr. Locey makes it a point to remindus that 'these are not the days of Miss Taggart.' At the first sign oftrouble, he calls me into his office and asks me—casually, in the midst ofthe most irrelevant drivel—what Miss Taggart used to do in such an emergency.I tell him, whenever I can. I tell myself that it's Taggart Transcontinental,and . . . and there's thousands of lives on dozens of trains that hang on ourdecisions. Between emergencies, Mr. Locey goes out of his way to be rude tome—that's so I wouldn't think that he needs me. He's made it a point tochange everything she used to do, in every respect that doesn't matter, buthe's damn cautious not to change anything that matters. The only trouble isthat he can't always tell which is which. . . . On his first day in heroffice, he told me that it wasn't a good idea to have a picture of NatTaggart on the wall—

'Nat Taggart, ' he said, 'belongs to a dark past, to the age of selfishgreed, he is not exactly a symbol of our modern, progressive policies, so itcould make a bad impression, people could identify me with him.' 'No, theycouldn't, ' I said—but I took the picture off his wall. . . . What?

. . . No, she doesn't know any of it. I haven't communicated with her.Not once. She told me not to. . . . Last week, I almost quit. It was overChick's Special. Mr. Chick Morrison of Washington, whoever the hell he is,has gone on a speaking tour of the whole country—to speak about the directiveand build up the people's morale, as things are getting to be pretty wildeverywhere. He demanded a special train, for himself and party—a sleeper, aparlor car and a diner with barroom and lounge. The Unification Board gavehim permission to travel at a hundred miles an hour—by reason, the rulingsaid, of this being a non-profit journey. Well, so it is. It's just a journeyto talk people into continuing to break their backs at making profits inorder to support men who are superior by reason of not making any. Well, ourtrouble came when Mr. Chick Morrison demanded a Diesel engine for his train.We had none to give him. Every Diesel we own is out on the road, pulling theComet and the transcontinental freights, and there wasn't a spare oneanywhere on the system, except—well, that was an exception I wasn't going tomention to Mr. Clifton Locey.

Mr. Locey raised the roof, screaming that come hell or high water wecouldn't refuse a demand of Mr. Chick Morrison. I don't know what damn foolfinally told him about the extra Diesel that was kept at Winston, Colorado,at the mouth of the tunnel. You know the way our Diesels break down nowadays,they're all breathing their last—so you can understand why that extra Dieselhad to be kept at the tunnel. I explained it to Mr. Locey, I threatened him,I pleaded, I told him that she had made it our strictest rule that WinstonStation was never to be left without an extra Diesel. He told me to rememberthat he was not Miss Taggart—as if I could ever forget it!—and that the rule

was nonsense, because nothing had happened all these years, so Winston coulddo without a Diesel for a couple of months, and he wasn't going to worryabout some theoretical disaster in the future when we were up against thevery real, practical, immediate disaster of getting Mr.

Chick Morrison angry at us. Well, Chick's Special got the Diesel. Thesuperintendent of the Colorado Division quit. Mr. Locey gave that job to afriend of his own. I wanted to quit. I had never wanted to so badly. But Ididn't. . . . No, I haven't heard from her. I haven't heard a word since sheleft. Why do you keep questioning me about her? Forget it. She won't be back,. . . I don't know what it is that I'm hoping for. Nothing, I guess. I justgo day by day, and I try not to look ahead. At first, I hoped that somebodywould save us. I thought maybe it would be Hank Rearden. But he gave in. Idon't know what they did to him to make him sign, but I know that it musthave been something terrible. Everybody thinks so. Everybody's whisperingabout it, wondering what sort of pressure was used on him. . . . No, nobodyknows. He's made no public statements and he's refused to see anyone, . . .But, listen, I'll tell you something else that everybody's whispering about.Lean closer, will you?—I don't want to speak too loudly. They say that OrrenBoyle seems to have known about that directive long ago, weeks or months inadvance, because he had started, quietly and secretly, to reconstruct hisfurnaces for the production of Rearden Metal, in one of his lesser steelplants, an obscure little place way out on the coast of Maine, He was readyto start pouring the Metal the moment Rearden's extortion paper—I mean, GiftCertificate—was signed. But—listen—the night before they were to start,Boyle's men were heating the furnaces in that place on the coast, when theyheard a voice, they didn't know whether it came from a plane or a radio orsome sort of loud-speaker, but it was a man's voice and it said that he wouldgive them ten minutes to get out of the place.

They got out. They started going and they kept on going—because the man'svoice had said that he was Ragnar Danneskjold. In the next half-hour, Boyle'smills were razed to the ground. Razed, wiped out, not a brick of them leftstanding. They say it was done by long-range naval guns, from somewhere wayout on the Atlantic. Nobody saw Danneskjold's ship. . . . That's what peopleare whispering. The newspapers haven't printed a word about it. The boys inWashington say that it's only a rumor spread by panic-mongers. ... I don'tknow whether the story is true. I think it is. I hope it is. . . . You know,when I was fifteen years old, I used to wonder how any man could become acriminal, I couldn't understand what would make it possible.

Now—now I'm glad that Ragnar Danneskjold has blown up those mills. May Godbless him and never let them find him, whatever and wherever he is! . . .Yes, that's what I've come to feel. Well, how much do they think people cantake? . . . It's not so bad for me in the daytime, because I can keep busyand not think, but it gets me at night. I can't sleep any more, I lie awakefor hours. . . . Yes!—if you want to know it—yes, it's because I'm worriedabout her! I'm scared to death for her. Woodstock is just a miserable littlehole of a place, miles away from everything, and the Taggart lodge is twentymiles farther, twenty miles of a twisting trail in a godforsaken forest. Howdo I know what might happen to her there, alone, and with the kind of gangsthat are roving all through the country these nights—just through suchdesolate parts of the country as the Berkshires? ... I know I shouldn'tthink about it. I know that she can take care of herself. Only I wish she'ddrop me a line. I wish I could go there. But she told me not to.

I told her I'd wait. . . . You know, I'm glad you're here tonight. Ithelps me—talking to you and . . . just seeing you here. You won't vanish,like all the others, will you? . . . What? Next week? . . . Oh, on yourvacation. For how long? . . . How do you rate a whole month's vacation? . . .I wish I could do that, too—take a month off at my own expense. But they

wouldn't let me. . . . Really? I envy you. ... I wouldn't have envied you afew years ago. But now—now I'd like to get away. Now I envy you—if you'vebeen able to take a month off every summer for twelve years."

It was a dark road, but it led in a new direction. Rearden walked from hismills, not toward his house, but toward the city of Philadelphia.

It was a great distance to walk, but he had wanted to do it tonight, as hehad done it every evening of the past week. He felt at peace in the emptydarkness of the countryside, with nothing but the black shapes of treesaround him, with no motion but that of his own body and of branches stirringin the wind, with no lights but the slow sparks of the fireflies flickeringthrough the hedges. The two hours between mills and city were his span ofrest.

He had moved out of his home to an apartment in Philadelphia. He had givenno explanation to his mother and Philip, he had said nothing except that theycould remain in the house if they wished and that Miss Ives would take careof their bills. He had asked them to tell Lillian, when she returned, thatshe was not to attempt to see him.

They had stared at him in terrified silence.

He had handed to his attorney a signed blank check and said, "Get me adivorce. On any grounds and at any cost. I don't care what means you use, howmany of their judges you purchase or whether you find it necessary to stage aframe-up of my wife. Do whatever you wish.

But there is to be no alimony and no property settlement." The attorneyhad looked at him with the hint of a wise, sad smile, as if this were anevent he had expected to happen long ago. He had answered, "Okay, Hank. Itcan be done. But it will take some time." "Make it as fast as you can."

No one had questioned him about his signature on the Gift Certificate. Buthe had noticed that the men at the mills looked at him with a kind ofsearching curiosity, almost as if they expected to find the scars of somephysical torture on his body.

He felt nothing—nothing but the sense of an even, restful twilight, like aspread of slag over a molten metal, when it crusts and swallows the lastbrilliant spurt of the white glow within. He felt nothing at the thought ofthe looters who were now going to manufacture Rearden Metal. His desire tohold his right to it and proudly to be the only one to sell it, had been hisform of respect for his fellow men, his belief that to trade with them was anact of honor. The belief, the respect and the desire were gone. He did notcare what men made, what they sold, where they bought his Metal or whetherany of them would know that it had been his. The human shapes moving past himin the streets of the city were physical objects without any meaning. Thecountryside —with the darkness washing away all traces of human activity,leaving only an untouched earth which he had once been able to handle—wasreal.

He carried a gun in his pocket, as advised by the policemen of the radiocar that patrolled the roads; they had warned him that no road was safe afterdark, these days. He felt, with a touch of mirthless amusement, that the gunhad been needed at the mills, not in the peaceful safety of loneliness andnight; what could some starving vagrant take from him, compared to what hadbeen taken by men who claimed to be his protectors?

He walked with an effortless speed, feeling relaxed by a form of activitythat was natural to him. This was his period of training for solitude, hethought; he had to learn to live without any awareness of people, theawareness that now paralyzed him with revulsion. He had once built hisfortune, starting out with empty hands; now he had to rebuild his life,starting out with an empty spirit.

He would give himself a short span of time for the training, he thought,and then he would claim the one incomparable value still left to him, the one

desire that had remained pure and whole: he would go to Dagny. Twocommandments had grown in his mind; one was a duty, the other a passionatewish. The first was never to let her learn the reason of his surrender to thelooters; the second was to say to her the words which he should have known attheir first meeting and should have said on the gallery of Ellis Wyatt'shouse.

There was nothing but the strong summer starlight to guide him, as hewalked, but he could distinguish the highway and the remnant of a stone fenceahead, at the corner of a country crossroad. The fence had nothing to protectany longer, only a spread of weeds, a willow tree bending over the road and,farther in the distance, the ruin of a farmhouse with the starlight showingthrough its roof.

He walked, thinking that even this sight still retained the power to be ofvalue: it gave him the promise of a long stretch of space undisturbed byhuman intrusion.

The man who stepped suddenly out into the road must have come from behindthe willow tree, but so swiftly that it seemed as if he had sprung up fromthe middle of the highway. Rearden's hand went to the gun in his pocket, butstopped: he knew—by the proud posture of the body standing in the open, bythe straight line of the shoulders against the starlit sky—that the man wasnot a bandit. When he heard the voice, he knew that the man was not a beggar.

"I should like to speak to you, Mr. Rearden."

The voice had the firmness, the clarity and the special courtesy peculiarto men who are accustomed to giving orders.

"Go ahead," said Rearden, "provided you don't intend to ask me for help ormoney."

The man's garments were rough, but efficiently trim. He wore dark trousersand a dark blue windbreaker closed tight at his throat, prolonging the linesof his long, slender figure. He wore a dark blue cap, and all that could beseen of him in the night were his hands, his face and a patch of gold-blondhair on his temple. The hands held no weapon, only a package wrapped inburlap, the size of a carton of cigarettes.

"No, Mr. Rearden," he said, "I don't intend to ask you for money, but toreturn it to you."

"To return money?"

"Yes."

"What money?"

"A small refund on a very large debt.""Owed by you?"

"No, not by me. It is only a token payment, but I want you to accept it asproof that if we live long enough, you and I, every dollar of that debt willbe returned to you."

"What debt?"

"The money that was taken from you by force."

He extended the package to Rearden, flipping the burlap open.Rearden saw the starlight run like fire along a mirror-smooth surface.He knew, by its weight and texture, that what he held was a bar of solidgold.

He looked from the bar to the man's face, but the face seemed harder andless revealing than the surface of the metal."Who are you?" asked Rearden."The friend of the friendless.""Did you come here to give this to me?""Yes."

"Do you mean that you had to stalk me at night, on a lonely road, inorder, not to rob me, but to hand me a bar of gold?""Yes."

"Why?"

"When robbery is done in open daylight by sanction of the law, as it isdone today, then any act of honor or restitution has to be hiddenunderground."

"What made you think that I'd accept a gift of this kind?"

"It is not a gift, Mr. Rearden. It is your own money. But I have one favorto ask of you. It is a request, not a condition, because there can be no suchthing as conditional property. The gold is yours, so you are free to use itas you please. But I risked my life to bring it to you tonight, so I amasking, as a favor, that you save it for the future or spend it on yourself.On nothing but your own comfort and pleasure. Do not give it away and, aboveall, do not put it into your business."

"Why?"

"Because I don't want it to be of any benefit to anybody but you.Otherwise, I will have broken an oath taken long ago—as I am breakingevery rule I had set for myself by speaking to you tonight.""What do you mean?"

"I have been collecting this money for you for a long time. But I did notintend to see you or tell you about it or give it to you until much later.""Then why did you?"

"Because I couldn't stand it any longer.""Stand what?"

"I thought that I had seen everything one could see and that there wasnothing I could not stand seeing. But when they took Rearden Metal away fromyou, it was too much, even for me. I know that you don't need this gold atpresent. What you need is the justice which it represents, and the knowledgethat there are men who care for justice."

Struggling not to give in to an emotion which he felt rising through hisbewilderment, past all his doubts, Rearden tried to study the man's face,searching for some clue to help him understand. But the face had noexpression; it had not changed once while speaking; it looked as if the manhad lost the capacity to feel long ago, and what remained of him were onlyfeatures that seemed implacable and dead. With a shudder of astonishment,Rearden found himself thinking that it was not the face of a man, but of anavenging angel.

"Why did you care?" asked Rearden. "What do I mean to you?"

"Much more than you have reason to suspect. And I have a friend to whomyou mean much more than you will ever learn. He would have given anything tostand by you today. But he can't come to you. So I came in his place."

"What friend?"

"I prefer not to name him."

"Did you say that you've spent a long time collecting this money for me?"

"I have collected much more than this." He pointed at the gold. "I amholding it in your name and I will turn it over to you when the time comes.This is only a sample, as proof that it does exist. And if you reach the daywhen you find yourself robbed of the last of your fortune, I want you toremember that you have a large bank account waiting for you."

"What account?"

"If you try to think of all the money that has been taken from you byforce, you will know that your account represents a considerable sum.""How did you collect it? Where did this gold come from?""It was taken from those who robbed you.""Taken by whom?""By me.""Who are you?""Ragnar Danneskjold."

Rearden looked at him for a long, still moment, then let the gold fall outof his hands.

Danneskjold's eyes did not follow it to the ground, but remained fixed onRearden with no change of expression. "Would you rather I were a law-abidingcitizen, Mr. Rearden? If so, which law should I abide by? Directive 10-289?"

"Ragnar Danneskjold . . ." said Rearden, as if he were seeing the whole ofthe past decade, as if he were looking at the enormity of a crime spreadthrough ten years and held within two words.

"Look more carefully, Mr. Rearden. There are only two modes of living leftto us today: to be a looter who robs disarmed victims or to be a victim whoworks for the benefit of his own despoilers. I did not choose to be either."

"You chose to live by means of force, like the rest of them,"

"Yes—openly. Honestly, if you will. I do not rob men who are tied andgagged, I do not demand that my victims help me, I do not tell them that I amacting for their own good. I stake my life in every encounter with men, andthey have a chance to match their guns and their brains against mine in fairbattle. Fair? It's I against the organized strength, the guns, the planes,the battleships of five continents. If it's a moral judgment that you wish topronounce, Mr. Rearden, then who is the man of higher morality: I or WesleyMouch?"

"I have no answer to give you," said Rearden, his voice low.

"Why should you be shocked, Mr. Rearden? I am merely complying with thesystem which my fellow men have established. If they believe that force isthe proper means to deal with one another, I am giving them what they askfor. If they believe that the purpose of my life is to serve them, let themtry to enforce their creed. If they believe that my mind is their property-let them come and get it."

"But what sort of life have you chosen? To what purpose are you givingyour mind?"

"To the cause of my love."

"Which is what?"

"Justice."

"Served by being a pirate?"

"By working for the day when I won't have to be a pirate any longer.""Which day is that?"

"The day when you'll be free to make a profit on Rearden Metal.""Oh God!" said Rearden, laughing, his voice desperate. "Is that yourambition?"

Danneskjold's face did not change. "It is.""Do you expect to live to see that day?""Yes. Don't you?""No. "

"Then what are you looking forward to, Mr. Rearden?""Nothing."

"What are you working for?"

Rearden glanced at him. "Why do you ask that?"

"To make you understand why I'm not."

"Don't expect me ever to approve of a criminal."

"I don't expect it. But there are a few things I want to help you to see."

"Even if they're true, the things you said, why did you choose to be abandit? Why didn't you simply step out, like—" He stopped.

"Like Ellis Wyatt, Mr. Rearden? Like Andrew Stockton? Like your friend KenDanagger?"

"Yes ! "

"Would you approve of that?"

"I—" He stopped, shocked by his own words.

The shock that came next was to see Danneskjold smile: it was like seeingthe first green of spring on the sculptured planes of an iceberg. Reardenrealized suddenly, for the first time, that Danneskjold's face was more thanhandsome, that it had the startling beauty of physical perfection—the hard,proud features, the scornful mouth of a Viking's statue—yet he had not beenaware of it, almost as if the dead sternness of the face had forbidden theimpertinence of an appraisal.

But the smile was brilliantly alive.

"I do approve of it, Mr. Rearden. But I've chosen a special mission of myown. I'm after a man whom I want to destroy. He died many centuries ago, butuntil the last trace of him is wiped out of men's minds, we will not have adecent world to live in."

"What man?"

"Robin Hood."

Rearden looked at him blankly, not understanding.

"He was the man who robbed the rich and gave to the poor. Well, I'm theman who robs the poor and gives to the rich—or, to be exact, the man who robsthe thieving poor and gives back to the productive rich."

"What in blazes do you mean?"

"If you remember the stories you've read about me in the newspapers,before they stopped printing them, you know that I have never robbed aprivate ship and never taken any private property. Nor have I ever robbed amilitary vessel—because the purpose of a military fleet is to protect fromviolence the citizens who paid for it, which is the proper function of agovernment. But I have seized every loot carrier that came within range of myguns, every government relief ship, subsidy ship, loan ship, gift ship, everyvessel with a cargo of goods taken by force from some men for the unpaid,unearned benefit of others. I seized the boats that sailed under the flag ofthe idea which I am fighting: the idea that need is a sacred idol requiringhuman sacrifices—that the need of some men is the knife of a guillotinehanging over others—that all of us must live with our work, our hopes, ourplans, our efforts at the mercy of the moment when that knife will descendupon us—and that the extent of our ability is the extent of our danger, sothat success will bring our heads down on the block, while failure will giveus the right to pull the cord. This is the horror which Robin Hoodimmortalized as an ideal of righteousness. It is said that he fought againstthe looting rulers and returned the loot to those who had been robbed, butthat is not the meaning of the legend which has survived. He is remembered,not as a champion of property, but as a champion of need, not as a defenderof the robbed, but as a provider of the poor. He is held to be the first manwho assumed a halo of virtue by practicing charity with wealth which he didnot own, by giving away goods which he had not produced, by making others payfor the luxury of his pity. He is the man who became the symbol of the ideathat need, not achievement, is the source of rights, that we don't have toproduce, only to want, that the earned does not belong to us, but theunearned does. He became a justification for every mediocrity who, unable tomake his own living, has demanded the power to dispose of the property of hisbetters, by proclaiming his willingness to devote his life to his inferiorsat the price of robbing his superiors. It is this foulest of creatures—thedouble-parasite who lives on the sores, of the poor and the blood of therich—whom men have come to regard as a moral ideal. And this has brought usto a world where the more a man produces, the closer he comes to the loss ofall his rights, until, if his ability is great enough, he becomes a rightlesscreature delivered as prey to any claimant—while in order to be placed aboverights, above principles, above morality, placed where anything is permittedto him, even plunder and murder, all a man has to do is to be in need. Do youwonder why the world is collapsing around us? That is what I am fighting, Mr.

Rearden. Until men learn that of all human symbols, Robin Hood is the mostimmoral and the most contemptible, there will be no justice on earth and noway for mankind to survive."

Rearden listened, feeling numb. But under the numbness, like the firstthrust of a seed breaking through, he felt an emotion he could not identifyexcept that it seemed familiar and very distant, like something experiencedand renounced long ago.

"What I actually am, Mr. Rearden, is a policeman. It is a policeman's dutyto protect men from criminals—criminals being those who seize wealth byforce. It is a policeman's duty to retrieve stolen property and return it toits owners. But when robbery becomes the purpose of the law, and thepoliceman's duty becomes, not the protection, but the plunder of property-then it is an outlaw who has to become a policeman. I have been selling thecargoes I retrieved to some special customers of mine in this country, whopay me in gold. Also, I have been selling my cargoes to the smugglers and theblack-market traders of the People's States of Europe. Do you know theconditions of existence in those People's States? Since production and trade—not violence—were decreed to be crimes, the best men of Europe had no choicebut to become criminals. The slave-drivers of those States are kept in powerby the handouts from their fellow looters in countries not yet fully drained,such as this country. I do not let the handouts reach them. I sell the goodsto Europe's law-breakers, at the highest prices I can get, and I make thempay me in gold. Gold is the objective value, the means of preserving one'swealth and one's future. Nobody is permitted to have gold in Europe, exceptthe whip-wielding friends of humanity, who claim that they spend it for thewelfare of their victims. That is the gold which my smuggler-customers obtainto pay me.

How? By the same method I use to obtain the goods. And then I return thegold to those from whom the goods were stolen—to you, Mr.Rearden, and to other men like you."

Rearden grasped the nature of the emotion he had forgotten. It was theemotion he had felt when, at the age of fourteen, he had looked at his firstpay check—when, at the age of twenty-four, he had been made superintendent ofthe ore mines—when, as the owner of the mines, he had placed, in his ownname, his first order for new equipment from the best concern of the time,Twentieth Century Motors—

an emotion of solemn, joyous excitement, the sense of winning his place ina world he respected and earning the recognition of men he admired. Foralmost two decades, that emotion had been buried under a mount of wreckage,as the years had added layer upon gray layer of contempt, of indignation, ofhis struggle not to look around him, not to see those he dealt with, not toexpect anything from men and to keep, as a private vision within the fourwalls of his office, the sense of that world into which he had hoped to rise.Yet there it was again, breaking through from under the wreckage, thatfeeling of quickened interest, of listening to the luminous voice of reason,with which one could communicate and deal and live. But it was the voice of apirate speaking about acts of violence, offering him this substitute for hisworld of reason and justice. He could not accept it; he could not losewhatever remnant of his vision he still retained. He listened, wishing hecould escape, yet knowing that he would not miss a word of it.

"I deposit the gold in a bank—in a gold-standard bank, Mr. Rearden —to theaccount of men who are its rightful owners. They are the men of superlativeability who made their fortunes by personal effort, in free trade, using nocompulsion, no help from the government. They are the great victims who havecontributed the most and suffered the worst injustice in return. Their namesare written in my book of restitution. Every load of gold which I bring backis divided among them and deposited to their accounts."

"Who are they?"

"You're one of them, Mr. Rearden. I cannot compute all the money that hasbeen extorted from you—in hidden taxes, in regulations, in wasted time, inlost effort, in energy spent to overcome artificial obstacles. I cannotcompute the sum, but if you wish to see its magnitude —look around you. Theextent of the misery now spreading through this once prosperous country isthe extent of the injustice which you have suffered. If men refuse to pay thedebt they owe you, this is the manner in which they will pay for it. Butthere is one part of the debt which is computed and on record. That is thepart which I have made it my purpose to collect and return to you."

"What is that?"

"Your income tax, Mr. Rearden.""What?"

"Your income tax for the last twelve years."

"You intend to refund that?"

"In full and in gold, Mr. Rearden."

Rearden burst out laughing; he laughed like a young boy, in simpleamusement, in enjoyment of the incredible. "Good God! You're a policeman anda collector of Internal Revenue, too?"

"Yes," said Danneskjold gravely.

"You're not serious about this, are you?"

"Do I look as if I'm joking?"

"But this is preposterous!"

"Any more preposterous than Directive 10-289?"

"It's not real or possible!"

"Is only evil real and possible?"

"But-"

"Are you thinking that death and taxes are our only certainty, Mr.

Rearden? Well, there's nothing I can do about the first, but if I lift theburden of the second, men might learn to see the connection between the twoand what a longer, happier life they have the power to achieve. They mightlearn to hold, not death and taxes, but life and production as their twoabsolutes and as the base of their moral code."

Rearden looked at him, not smiling. The tall, slim figure, with thewindbreaker stressing its trained muscular agility, was that of a highwayman;the stern marble face was that of a judge; the dry, clear voice was that ofan efficient bookkeeper.

"The looters are not the only ones who have kept records on you, Mr.Rearden. So have I. I have, in my files, copies of all your income taxreturns for the last twelve years, as well as the returns of all my otherclients. I have friends in some astonishing places, who obtain the copies Ineed. I divide the money among my clients in proportion to the sums extortedfrom them. Most of my accounts have now been paid to their owners. Yours isthe largest one left to settle. On the day when you will be ready to claimit—the day when I'll know that no penny of it will go back to support thelooters—I will turn your account over to you. Until then—" He glanced down atthe gold on the ground. "Pick it up, Mr. Rearden. It's not stolen. It'syours."

Rearden would not move or answer or look down.

"Much more than that lies in the bank, in your name."

"What bank?"

"Do you remember Midas Mulligan of Chicago?""Yes, of course."

"All my accounts are deposited at the Mulligan Bank.""There is no Mulligan Bank in Chicago.""It is not in Chicago."

Rearden let a moment pass. "Where is it?"

"I think that you will know it before long, Mr. Rearden. But I cannot tellyou now." He added, "I must tell you, however, that I am the only oneresponsible for this undertaking. It is my own personal mission. No one isinvolved in it but me and the men of my ship's crew.

Even my banker has no part in it, except for keeping the money I deposit.Many of my friends do not approve of the course I've chosen.

But we all choose different ways to fight the same battle—and this ismine. "

Rearden smiled contemptuously, "Aren't you one of those damn altruists whospends his time on a non-profit venture and risks his life merely to serveothers?"

"No, Mr. Rearden. I am investing my time in my own future.

When we are free and have to start rebuilding from out of the ruins, Iwant to see the world reborn as fast as possible. If there is, then, someworking capital in the right hands—in the hands of our best, our mostproductive men—it will save years for the rest of us and, incidentally,centuries for the history of the country. Did you ask what you meant to me?Everything I admire, everything I want to be on the day when the earth willhave a place for such state of being, everything I want to deal with—even ifthis is the only way I can deal with you and be of use to you at present."

"Why?" whispered Rearden.

"Because my only love, the only value I care to live for, is that whichhas never been loved by the world, has never won recognition or friends ordefenders: human ability. That is the love I am serving—and if I should losemy life, to what better purpose could I give it?"

The man who had lost the capacity to feel?—thought Rearden, and knew thatthe austerity of the marble face was the form of a disciplined capacity tofeel too deeply. The even voice was continuing dispassionately: "I wanted youto know this. I wanted you to know it now, when it most seem to you thatyou're abandoned at the bottom of a pit among subhuman creatures who are allthat's left of mankind. I wanted you to know, in your most hopeless hour,that the day of deliverance is much closer than you think. And there was onespecial reason why I had to speak to you and tell you my secret ahead of theproper time.

Have you heard of what happened to Orren Boyle's steel mills on the coastof Maine?"

"Yes," said Rearden—and was shocked to hear that the word came as a gaspout of the sudden jolt of eagerness within him. "I didn't know whether it wastrue. "

"It's true. I did it. Mr. Boyle is not going to manufacture Rearden Metalon the coast of Maine. He is not going to manufacture it anywhere. Neither isany other looting louse who thinks that a directive can give him a right toyour brain. Whoever attempts to produce that Metal, will find his furnacesblown up, his machinery blasted, his shipments wrecked, his plant set onfire—so many things will happen to any man who tries it, that people will saythere's a curse on it, and there will soon be no worker in the countrywilling to enter the plant of any new producer of Rearden Metal. If men likeBoyle think that force is all they need to rob their betters—let them seewhat happens when one of their betters chooses to resort to force. I wantedyou to know, Mr. Rearden, that none of them will produce your Metal nor makea penny on it."

Because he felt an exultant desire to laugh—as he had laughed at the newsof Wyatt's fire, as he had laughed at the crash of d'Anconia Copper—and knewthat if he did, the thing he feared would hold him, would not release himthis time, and he would never see his mills again—Rearden drew back and, fora moment, kept his lips closed tight to utter no sound. When the moment was

over, he said quietly, his voice firm and dead, "Take that gold of yours andget away from here. I won't accept the help of a criminal."

Danneskjold's face showed no reaction. "I cannot force you to accept thegold, Mr. Rearden. But I will not take it back. You may leave it lying whereit is, if you wish."

"I don't want your help and I don't intend to protect you. If I werewithin reach of a phone, I would call the police. I would and I will, if youever attempt to approach me again. I'll do it—in self-protection."

"I understand exactly what you mean."

"You know—because I've listened to you, because you've seen me eager tohear it—that I haven't damned you as I should. I can't damn you or anyoneelse. There are no standards left for men to live by, so I don't care tojudge anything they do today or in what manner they attempt to endure theunendurable. If this is your manner, I will let you go to hell in your ownway, but I want no part of it. Neither as your inspiration nor as youraccomplice. Don't expect me ever to accept your bank account, if it doesexist. Spend it on some extra armor plate for yourself—because I'm going toreport this to the police and give them every clue I can to set them on yourtrail."

Danneskjold did not move or answer. A freight train was rolling by,somewhere in the distance and darkness; they could not see it, but they heardthe pounding beat of wheels filling the silence, and it seemed close, as if adisembodied train, reduced to a long string of sound, were going past them inthe night.

"You wanted to help me in my most hopeless hour?" said Rearden.

"If I am brought to where my only defender is a pirate, then I don't careto be defended any longer. You speak some remnant of a human language, so inthe name of that, I'll tell you that I have no hope left, but I have theknowledge that when the end comes, I will have lived by my own standards,even while I was the only one to whom they remained valid. I will have livedin the world in which I started and J will go down with the last of it. Idon't think you'll want to understand me, but—"

A beam of light hit them with the violence of a physical blow. The clangorof the train had swallowed the noise of the motor and they had not heard theapproach of the car that swept out of the side road, from behind thefarmhouse. They were not in the car's path, yet they heard the screech ofbrakes behind the two headlights, pulling an invisible shape to a stop. Itwas Rearden who jumped back involuntarily and had time to marvel at hiscompanion: the swiftness of Danneskjold' s self-control was that he did notmove.

It was a police car and it stopped beside them.

The driver leaned out. "Oh, it's you, Mr. Rearden!" he said, touching hisfingers to his cap. "Good evening, sir."

"Hello, " said Rearden, fighting to control the unnatural abruptness of hisvoice.

There were two patrolmen in the front seat of the car and their faces hada tight look of purpose, not the look of their usual friendly intention tostop for a chat.

"Mr. Rearden, did you walk from the mills by way of Edgewood Road, pastBlacksmith Cove?""Yes. Why?"

"Did you happen to see a man anywhere around these parts, a strangermoving along in a hurry?""Where?"

"He'd be either on foot or in a battered wreck of a car that's got amillion-dollar motor.""What man?"

"A tall man with blond hair.""Who is he?"

"You wouldn't believe it if I told you, Mr. Rearden. Did you see him?"

Rearden was not aware of his own questions, only of the astonishing factthat he was able to force sounds past some beating barrier inside his throat.He was looking straight at the policeman, but he felt as if the focus of hiseyes had switched to his side vision, and what he saw most clearly wasDanneskjold's face watching him with no expression, with no line's, nomuscle's worth of feeling. He saw Danneskjold's arms hanging idly by hissides, the hands relaxed, with no sign of intention to reach for a weapon,leaving the tall, straight body defenseless and open—open as to a firingsquad. He saw, in the light, that the face looked younger than he had thoughtand that the eyes were sky-blue.

He felt that his one danger would be to glance directly at Danneskjold—andhe kept his eyes on the policeman, on the brass buttons of a blue uniform,but the object filling his consciousness, more forcefully than a visualperception, was Danneskjold's body, the naked body under the clothes, thebody that would be wiped out of existence. He did not hear his own words,because he kept hearing a single sentence in his mind, without context exceptthe feeling that it was the only thing that mattered to him in the world: "IfI should lose my life, to what better purpose could I give it?"

"Did you see him, Mr. Rearden?"

"No," said Rearden. "I didn't."

The policeman shrugged regretfully and closed his hands about the steeringwheel. "You didn't see any man that looked suspicious?""No. "

"Nor any strange car passing you on the road?""No. "

The policeman reached for the starter. "They got word that he was seenashore in these parts tonight, and they've thrown a dragnet over fivecounties. We're not supposed to mention his name, not to scare the folks, buthe's a man whose head is worth three million dollars in rewards from all overthe world."

He had pressed the starter and the motor was churning the air with brightcracks of sound, when the second policeman leaned forward.

He had been looking at the blond hair under Danneskjold's cap."Who is that, Mr. Rearden?" he asked."My new bodyguard," said Rearden.

"Oh . . . ! A sensible precaution, Mr. Rearden, in times like these.Good night, sir."

The motor jerked forward. The red taillights of the car went shrinkingdown the road. Danneskjold watched it go, then glanced pointedly at Rearden'sright hand. Rearden realized that he had stood facing the policemen with hishand clutching the gun in his pocket and that he had been prepared to use it.

He opened his fingers and drew his hand out hastily. Danneskjold smiled.It was a smile of radiant amusement, the silent laughter of a clear, youngspirit greeting a moment it was glad to have lived.

And although the two did not resemble each other, the smile made Reardenthink of Francisco d'Anconia.

"You haven't told a lie," said Ragnar Danneskjold. "Your bodyguard—that'swhat I am and what I'll deserve to be, in many more ways than you can know atpresent. Thanks, Mr. Rearden, and so long—we'll meet again much sooner than Ihad hoped."

He was gone before Rearden could answer. He vanished beyond the stonefence, as abruptly and soundlessly as he had come. When Rearden turned tolook through the farm field, there was no trace of him and no sign ofmovement anywhere in the darkness.

Rearden stood on the edge of an empty road in a spread of lonelinessvaster than it had seemed before. Then he saw, lying at his feet, an objectwrapped in burlap, with one corner exposed and glistening in the moonlight,the color of the pirate's hair. He bent, picked it up and walked on.

Kip Chalmers swore as the train lurched and spilled his cocktail over thetable top. He slumped forward, his elbow in the puddle, and said: "God damnthese railroads! What's the matter with their track?

You'd think with all the money they've got they'd disgorge a little, so wewouldn't have to bump like farmers on a hay cart!"

His three companions did not take the trouble to answer. It was late, andthey remained in the lounge merely because an effort was needed to retire totheir compartments. The lights of the lounge looked like feeble portholes ina fog of cigarette smoke dank with the odor of alcohol. It was a private car,which Chalmers had demanded and obtained for his journey; it was attached tothe end of the Comet and it swung like the tail of a nervous animal as theComet coiled through the curves of the mountains.

"I'm going to campaign for the nationalization of the railroads,"

said Kip Chalmers, glaring defiantly at a small, gray man who looked athim without interest. 'That's going to be my platform plank. I've got to havea platform plank. I don't like Jim Taggart. He looks like a soft-boiled clam.To hell with the railroads! It's time we took them over."

"Go to bed," said the man, "if you expect to look like anything human atthe big rally tomorrow."

"Do you think we'll make it?"

"You've got to make it."

"I know I've got to. But I don't think we'll get there on time. Thisgoddamn snail of a super-special is hours late."

"You've got to get there, Kip," said the man ominously, in that stubbornmonotone of the unthinking which asserts an end without concern for themeans.

"God damn you, don't you suppose I know it?"

Kip Chalmers had curly blond hair and a shapeless mouth. He came from asemi-wealthy, semi-distinguished family, but he sneered at wealth anddistinction in a manner which implied that only a top rank aristocrat couldpermit himself such a degree of cynical indifference. He had graduated from acollege which specialized in breeding that kind of aristocracy. The collegehad taught him that the purpose of ideas is to fool those who are stupidenough to think. He had made his way in Washington with the grace of a cat-burglar, climbing from bureau to bureau as from ledge to ledge of a crumblingstructure. He was ranked as semi-powerful, but his manner made laymen mistakehim for nothing less than Wesley Mouch.

For reasons of his own particular strategy, Kip Chalmers had decided toenter popular politics and to run for election as Legislator from California,though he knew nothing about that state except the movie industry and thebeach clubs. His campaign manager had done the preliminary work, and Chalmerswas now on his way to face his future constituents for the first time at anover publicized rally in San Francisco tomorrow night. The manager had wantedhim to start a day earlier, but Charmers had stayed in Washington to attend acocktail party and had taken the last train possible. He had shown no concernabout the rally until this evening, when he noticed that the Comet wasrunning six hours late.

His three companions did not mind his mood: they liked his liquor, testerTuck, his campaign manager, was a small, aging man with a face that looked asif it had once been punched in and had never rebounded. He was an attorneywho, some generations earlier, would have represented shoplifters and peoplewho stage accidents on the premises of rich corporations; now he found thathe could do better by representing men like Kip Chalmers.

Laura Bradford was Chalmers' current mistress; he liked her because hispredecessor had been Wesley Mouch. She was a movie actress who had forced herway from competent featured player to incompetent star, not by means ofsleeping with studio executives, but by taking the long-distance short cut ofsleeping with bureaucrats. She talked economics, instead of glamor, for pressinterviews, in the belligerently righteous style of a third-rate tabloid; hereconomics consisted of the assertion that "we've got to help the poor."

Gilbert Keith-Worthing was Chalmers' guest, for no reason that either ofthem could discover. He was a British novelist of world fame, who had beenpopular thirty years ago; since then, nobody bothered to read what he wrote,but everybody accepted him as a walking classic.

He had been considered profound for uttering such things as: "Freedom? Dolet's stop talking about freedom. Freedom is impossible. Man can never befree of hunger, of cold, of disease, of physical accidents.

He can never be free of the tyranny of nature. So why should he object tothe tyranny of a political dictatorship?" When all of Europe put intopractice the ideas which he bad preached, he came to live in America. Throughthe years, his style of writing and his body had grown flabby. At seventy, hewas an obese old man with retouched hair and a manner of scornful cynicismretouched by quotations from the yogis about the futility of all humanendeavor. Kip Chalmers had invited him, because it seemed to lookdistinguished. Gilbert Keith Worthing had come along, because he had noparticular place to go.

"God damn these railroad people!" said Kip Chalmers. "They're doing it onpurpose. They want to ruin my campaign. I can't miss that rally! For Christ'ssake, Lester, do something!"

"I've tried," said Lester Tuck. At the train's last stop, he had tried, bylong-distance telephone, to find air transportation to complete theirjourney; but there were no commercial flights scheduled for the next twodays.

"If they don't get me there on time, I'll have their scalps and theirrailroad! Can't we tell that damn conductor to hurry?""You've told him three times,"

"I'll get him fired. He's given me nothing but a lot of alibis about alltheir messy technical troubles. I expect transportation, not alibis. Theycan't treat me like one of their day-coach passengers. I expect them to getme where I want to go when I want it. Don't they know that I'm on thistrain?"

"They know it by now," said Laura Bradford. "Shut up, Kip. You bore me."

Chalmers refilled his glass. The car was rocking and the glassware tinkledfaintly on the shelves of the bar. The patches of starlit sky in the windowskept swaying jerkily, and it seemed as if the stars were tinkling against oneanother. They could see nothing beyond the glass bay of the observationwindow at the end of the car, except the small halos of red and greenlanterns marking the rear of the train, and a brief stretch of rail runningaway from them into the darkness. A wall of rock was racing the train, andthe stars dipped occasionally into a sudden break that outlined, high abovethem, the peaks of the mountains of Colorado.

"Mountains . . ." said Gilbert Keith-Worthing, with satisfaction.

"It is a spectacle of this kind that makes one feel the insignificance ofman.' What is this presumptuous little bit of rail, which crude materialistsare so proud of building—compared to that eternal grandeur? No more than thebasting thread of a seamstress on the hem of the garment of nature. If asingle one of those granite giants chose to crumble, it would annihilate thistrain. "

"Why should it choose to crumble?" asked Laura Bradford, without anyparticular interest.

"I think this damn train is going slower," said Kip Chalmers. "Thosebastards are slowing down,, in spite of what I told them!"

"Well . . . it's the mountains, you know . . ." said Lester Tuck.

"Mountains be damned! Lester, what day is this? With all those damnchanges of time, I can't tell which—"

"It's May twenty-seventh," sighed Lester Tuck.

"It's May twenty-eighth," said Gilbert Keith-Worthing, glancing at hiswatch. "It is now twelve minutes past midnight."

"Jesus!" cried Chalmers. "Then the rally is today?""Yep," said Lester Tuck."We won't make it! We—"

The train gave a sharper lurch, knocking the glass out of his hand.

The thin sound of its crash against the floor mixed with the screech ofthe wheel-flanges tearing against the rail of a sharp curve.

"I say," asked Gilbert Keith-Worthing nervously, "are your railroadssafe?"

"Hell, yes!" said Kip Chalmers. "We've got so many rules, regulations andcontrols that those bastards wouldn't dare not to be safe!. . . Lester, how far are we now? What's the next stop?'1"There won't be any stop till Salt Lake City.""I mean, what's the next station?"

Lester Tuck produced a soiled map, which he had been consulting every fewminutes since nightfall. "Winston," he said. "Winston, Colorado."Kip Chalmers reached for another glass.

"Tinky Holloway said that Wesley said that if you don't win this election,you're through," said Laura Bradford. She sat sprawled in her chair, lookingpast Chalmers, studying her own face in a mirror on the wall of the lounge;she was bored and it amused her to needle his impotent anger.

"Oh, he did, did he?"

"Uh-huh. Wesley doesn't want what's-his-name—whoever's running againstyou—to get into the Legislature. If you don't win, Wesley will be sore ashell. Tinky said-"

"Damn that bastard! He'd better watch his own neck!"

"Oh, I don't know. Wesley likes him very much." She added, "Tinky Hollowaywouldn't allow some miserable train to make him miss an important meeting.They wouldn't dare to hold him up."

Kip Chalmers sat staring at his glass. "I'm going to have the governmentseize all the railroads," he said, his voice low.

"Really," said Gilbert Keith-Worthing, "I don't see why you haven't doneit long ago. This is the only country on earth backward enough to permitprivate ownership of railroads."

"Well, we're catching up with you," said Kip Chalmers.

"Your country is so incredibly naive. It's such an anachronism. All thattalk about liberty and human rights—I haven't heard it since the days of mygreat-grandfather. It's nothing but a verbal luxury of the rich. After all,it doesn't make any difference to the poor whether their livelihood is at themercy of an industrialist or of a bureaucrat."

5S8

"The day of the industrialists is over. This is the day of—"The jolt felt as if the air within the car smashed them forward while thefloor stopped under their feet. Kip Chalmers was flung down to the carpet,Gilbert Keith-Worthing was thrown across the table top, the lights wereblasted out. Glasses crashed off the shelves, the steel of the walls screamedas if about to rip open, while a long, distant thud went like a convulsionthrough the wheels of the train.

When he raised his head, Chalmers saw that the car stood intact and still;he heard the moans of his companions and the first shriek of Laura Bradford's

hysterics. He crawled along the floor to the doorway, wrenched it open, andtumbled down the steps. Far ahead, on the side of a curve, he saw movingflashlights and a red glow at a spot where the engine had no place to be. Hestumbled through the darkness, bumping into half-clothed figures that wavedthe futile little flares of matches.

Somewhere along the line, he saw a man with a flashlight and seized hisarm. It was the conductor.

"What happened?" gasped Chalmers.

"Split rail," the conductor answered impassively. "The engine went off thetrack."

"Off . . . ?M"On its side.""Anybody . . . killed?"

"No. The engineer's all right. The fireman is hurt.""Split rail? What do you mean, split rail?"

The conductor's face had an odd look: it was grim, accusing and closed."Rail wears out, Mr. Chalmers," he answered with a strange kind of emphasis."Particularly on curves."

"Didn't you know that it was worn out?"

"We knew."

"Well, why didn't you have it replaced?"

"It was going to be replaced. But Mr. Locey cancelled that.""Who is Mr. Locey?"

"The man who is not our Operating Vice-President."

Chalmers wondered why the conductor seemed to look at him as if somethingabout the catastrophe were his fault. "Well . . . well, aren't you going toput the engine back on the track?"

"That engine's never going to be put back on any track, from the looks ofit. "

"But . . . but it's got to move us!""It can't."

Beyond the few moving flares and the dulled sounds of screams, Chalmerssensed suddenly, not wanting to look at it, the black immensity of themountains, the silence of hundreds of uninhabited miles, and the precariousstrip of a ledge hanging between a wall of rock and an abyss. He gripped theconductor's arm tighter.

"But . . . but what are we going to do?"

"The engineer's gone to call Winston."

"Call? How?"

"There's a phone couple of miles down the track.""Will they get us out of here?""They will."

"But . . ." Then his mind made a connection with the past and the future,and his voice rose to a scream for the first time: "How long will we have towait?"

"I don't know," said the conductor. He threw Chalmers' hand off his arm,and walked away.

The night operator of Winston Station listened to the phone message,dropped the receiver and raced up the stairs to shake the station agent outof bed. The station agent was a husky, surly drifter who had been assigned tothe job ten days ago, by order of the new division superintendent. Hestumbled dazedly to his feet, but he was knocked awake when the operator'swords reached his brain.

"What?" he gasped. "Jesus! The Comet? . . . Well, don't stand thereshaking! Call Silver Springs!"

The night dispatcher of the Division Headquarters at Silver Springslistened to the message, then telephoned Dave Mitchum, the new superintendentof the Colorado Division.

"The Comet?" gasped Mitchum, his hand pressing the telephone receiver tohis ear, his feet hitting the floor and throwing him upright, out of bed."The engine done for? The Diesel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Oh God! Oh, God Almighty! What are we going to do?" Then, remembering hisposition, he added, "Well, send out the wrecking train.""I have."

"Call the operator at Sherwood to hold all traffic.""I have."

"What have you got on the sheet?"

"The Army Freight Special, westbound. But it's not due for about fourhours. It's running late."

"I'll be right down. . . . Wait, listen, get Bill, Sandy and Clarence downby the time I get there. There's going to be hell to pay!"

Dave Mitchum had always complained about injustice, because, he said, hehad always had bad luck. He explained it by speaking darkly about theconspiracy of the big fellows, who would never give him a chance, though hedid not explain just whom he meant by "the big fellows." Seniority of servicewas his favorite topic of complaint and sole standard of value; he had beenin the railroad business longer than many men who had advanced beyond him;this, he said, was proof of the social system's injustice—though he neverexplained just what he meant by "the social system." He had worked for manyrailroads, but had not stayed long with any one of them. His employers hadhad no specific misdeeds to charge against him, but had simply eased him out,because he said, "Nobody told me to!" too often. He did not know that he owedhis present job to a deal between James Taggart and Wesley Mouch: whenTaggart traded to Mouch the secret of his sister's private life, in exchangefor a raise in rates, Mouch made him throw in an extra favor, by theircustomary rules of bargaining, which consisted of squeezing all one could outof any given trade. The extra was a job for Dave Mitchum, who was thebrother-in-law of Claude Slagenhop, who was the president of the Friends ofGlobal Progress, who were regarded by Mouch as a valuable influence on publicopinion. James Taggart pushed the responsibility of finding a job for Mitchumonto Clifton Locey. Locey pushed Mitchum into the first job that came up—superintendent of the Colorado Division—when the man holding it quit withoutnotice. The man quit when the extra Diesel engine of Winston Station wasgiven to Chick Morrison's Special.

"What are we going to do?" cried Dave Mitchum, rushing, half-dressed andgroggy with sleep, into his office, where the chief dispatcher, thetrainmaster and the road foreman of engines were waiting for him.

The three men did not answer. They were middle-aged men with years ofrailroad service behind them. A month ago, they would have volunteered theiradvice in any emergency; but they were beginning to learn that things hadchanged and that it was dangerous to speak.

"What in hell are we going to do?"

"One thing is certain," said Bill Brent, the chief dispatcher. "We can'tsend a train into the tunnel with a coal-burning engine."

Dave Mitchum's eyes grew sullen: he knew that this was the one thought onall their minds; he wished Brent had not named it.

"Well, where do we get a Diesel?" he asked angrily.

"We don't," said the road foreman.

"But we can't keep the Comet waiting on a siding all night!"

"Looks like we'll have to," said the trainmaster. "What's the use oftalking about it, Dave? You know that there is no Diesel anywhere on thedivision."

"But Christ Almighty, how do they expect us to move trains withoutengines ?"

"Miss Taggart didn't," said the road foreman. "Mr. Locey does."

"Bill," asked Mitchum, in the tone of pleading for a favor, "isn't thereanything transcontinental that's due tonight, with any sort of a Diesel?"

"The first one to come," said Bill Brent implacably, "will be Number 236,the fast freight from San Francisco, which is due at Winston at seven-eighteen A.M." He added, "That's the Diesel closest to us at this moment.I've checked,"

"What about the Army Special?"

"Better not think about it, Dave. That one has superiority over everythingon the line, including the Comet, by order of the Army.

They're running late as it is—journal boxes caught fire twice. They'recarrying munitions for the West Coast arsenals. Better pray that nothingstops them on your division. If you think we'll catch hell for holding theComet, it's nothing to what we'll catch if we try to stop that Special."

They remained silent. The windows were open to the summer night and theycould hear the ringing of the telephone in the dispatcher's officedownstairs. The signal lights winked over the deserted yards that had oncebeen a busy division point.

Mitchum looked toward the roundhouse, where the black silhouettes of a fewsteam engines stood outlined in a dim light.

"The tunnel—" he said and stopped.

"—is eight miles long," said the trainmaster, with a harsh emphasis."I was only thinking," snapped Mitchum."Better not think of it," said Brent softly."I haven't said anything!"

"What was that talk you had with Dick Horton before he quit?" the roadforeman asked too innocently, as if the subject were irrelevant.

"Wasn't it something about the ventilation system of the tunnel being onthe bum? Didn't he say that that tunnel was hardly safe nowadays even forDiesel engines?"

"Why do you bring that up?" snapped Mitchum. "I haven't said anything!"Dick Horton, the division chief engineer, had quit three days after Mitchum'sarrival.

"I thought I'd just mention it," the road foreman answered innocently.

"Look, Dave, " said Bill Brent, knowing that Mitchum would stall foranother hour rather than formulate a decision, "you know that there's onlyone thing to do: hold the Comet at Winston till morning, wait for Number 236,have her Diesel take the Comet through the tunnel, then let the Comet finishher run with the best coal-burner we can give her on the other side,"

"But how late will that make her?"

Brent shrugged. "Twelve hours—eighteen hours—who knows?""Eighteen hours—for the Comet? Christ, that's never happened before!""None of what's been happening to us has ever happened before,"said Brent, with an astonishing sound of weariness in his brisk, competentvoice.

"But they'll blame us for it in New York! They'll put all the blame onus ! "

Brent shrugged. A month ago, he would have considered such an injusticeinconceivable; today, he knew better.

"I guess . . ." said Mitchum miserably, "I guess there's nothing else thatwe can do."

"There isn't, Dave,"

"Oh God! Why did this have to happen to us?""Who is John Gait?"

It was half-past two when the Comet, pulled by an old switch engine,jerked to a stop on a siding of Winston Station. Kip Chalmers glanced outwith incredulous anger at the few shanties on a desolate mountainside and atthe ancient hovel of a station.

"Now what? What in hell are they stopping here for?" he cried, and rangfor the conductor.

With the return of motion and safety, his terror had turned into rage. Hefelt almost as if he had been cheated by having been made to experience anunnecessary fear. His companions were still clinging to the tables of thelounge; they felt too shaken to sleep.

"How long?" the conductor said impassively, in answer to his question."Till morning, Mr. Chalmers."

Chalmers stared at him, stupefied. "We're going to stand here tillmorning?"

"Yes, Mr. Chalmers."

"Here?"

"Yes."

"But I have a rally in San Francisco in the evening!"The conductor did not answer.

"Why? Why do we have to stand? Why in hell? What happened?"

Slowly, patiently, with contemptuous politeness, the conductor gave him anexact account of the situation. But years ago, in grammar school, in highschool, in college, Kip Chalmers had been taught that man does not and neednot live by reason.

"Damn your tunnel!" he screamed. "Do you think I'm going to let you holdme up because of some miserable tunnel? Do you want to wreck vital nationalplans on account of a tunnel? Tell your engineer that I must be in SanFrancisco by evening and that he's got to get me there!"

"How?"

"That's your job, not mine!""There is no way to do it.""Then find a way, God damn you!"The conductor did not answer.

"Do you think I'll let your miserable technological problems interferewith crucial social issues? Do you know who I am? Tell that engineer to startmoving, if he values his job!"

"The engineer has his orders."

"Orders be damned! I give the orders these days! Tell him to start atonce!"

"Perhaps you'd better speak to the station agent, Mr. Chalmers. I have noauthority to answer you as I'd like to," said the conductor, and walked out.

Chalmers leaped to his feet. "Say, Kip . . ." said Lester Tuck uneasily,"maybe it's true . . . maybe they can't do it."

"They can if they have to!" snapped Chalmers, marching resolutely to thedoor.

Years ago, in college, he had been taught that the only effective means toimpel men to action was fear.

In the dilapidated office of Winston Station, he confronted a sleepy manwith slack, worn features, and a frightened young boy who sat at theoperator's desk. They listened, in silent stupor, to a stream of profanitysuch as they had never heard from any section gang.

"—and it's not my problem how you get the train through the tunnel, that'sfor you to figure out!" Chalmers concluded. "But if you don't get me anengine and don't start that train, you can kiss good-bye to your jobs, yourwork permits and this whole goddamn railroad!"

The station agent had never heard of Kip Chalmers and did not know thenature of his position. But he knew that this was the day when unknown men inundefined positions held unlimited power—the power of life or death.

"It's not up to us, Mr. Chalmers," he said pleadingly. "We don't issue theorders out here. The order came from Silver Springs. Suppose you telephoneMr. Mitchum and—"

"Who's Mr. Mitchum?"

"He's the division superintendent at Silver Springs. Suppose you send hima message to—"

"I should bother with a division superintendent! I'll send a message toJim Taggart—that's what I'm going to do!"

Before the station agent had time to recover, Chalmers whirled to the boy,ordering, "You—take this down and send it at once!"

It was a message which, a month ago, the station agent would not haveaccepted from any passenger; the rules forbade it; but he was not certainabout any rules any longer: Mr. James Taggart, New York City. Am held up onthe Comet at Winston, Colorado, by the incompetence of your men, who refuseto give me an engine. Have meeting in San Francisco in the evening of top-level national importance. If you don't move my train at once, I'll let youguess the consequences. Kip Chalmers.

After the boy had transmitted the words onto the wires that stretched frompole to pole across a continent as guardians of the Taggart track—after KipChalmers had returned to Ms car to wait for an answer—the station agenttelephoned Dave Mitchum, who was his friend, and read to him the text of themessage. He heard Mitchum groan in answer.

"I thought I'd tell you, Dave. I never heard of the guy before, but maybehe's somebody important."

"I don't know!" moaned Mitchum. "Kip Chalmers? You see his name in thenewspapers all the time, right in with all the top-level boys, I don't knowwhat he is, but if he's from Washington, we can't take any chances. OhChrist, what are we going to do?"

We can't take any chances—thought the Taggart operator in New York, andtransmitted the message by telephone to James Taggart's home. It was close tosix A.M. in New York, and James Taggart was awakened out of the fitful sleepof a restless night. He listened to the telephone, his face sagging. He feltthe same fear as the station agent of Winston, and for the same reason.

He called the home of Clifton Locey. All the rage which he could not pourupon Kip Chalmers, was poured over the telephone wire upon Clifton Locey. "Dosomething!" screamed Taggart. "I don't care what you do, it's your job, notmine, but see to it that that train gets through! What in hell is going on? Inever heard of the Comet being held up! Is that how you run your department?It's a fine thing when important passengers have to start sending messages tome! At least, when my sister ran the place, I wasn't awakened in the middleof the night over every spike that broke in Iowa—Colorado, I mean!"

"I'm so sorry, Jim," said Clifton Locey smoothly, in a tone that balancedapology, reassurance and the right degree of patronizing confidence. "It'sjust a misunderstanding. It's somebody's stupid mistake.

Don't worry, 111 take care of it. I was, as a matter of fact, in bed, butI'll attend to it at once."

Clifton Locey was not in bed; he had just returned from a round of nightclubs, in the company of a young lady. He asked her to wait and hurried tothe offices of Taggart Transcontinental. None of the night staff who saw himthere could say why he chose to appear in person, but neither could they saythat it had been unnecessary. He rushed in and out of several offices, wasseen by many people and gave an impression of great activity. The onlyphysical result of it was an order that went over the wires to Dave Mitchum,superintendent of the Colorado Division: "Give an engine to Mr. Chalmers at

once. Send the Comet through safely and without unnecessary delay. If you areunable to perform your duties, I shall hold you responsible before theUnification Board, Clifton Locey,"

Then, calling his girl friend to join him, Clifton Locey drove to acountry roadhouse—to make certain that no one would be able to find him inthe next few hours.

The dispatcher at Silver Springs was baffled by the order that he handedto Dave Mitchum, but Dave Mitchum understood. He knew that no railroad orderwould ever speak in such terms as giving an engine to a passenger; he knewthat the thing was a show piece, he guessed what sort of show was beingstaged, and he felt a cold sweat at the realization of who was being framedas the goat of the show.

"What's the matter, Dave?" asked the trainmaster.

Mitchum did not answer. He seized the telephone, his hands shaking as hebegged for a connection to the Taggart operator in New York, He looked likean animal in a trap.

He begged the New York operator to get him Mr. Clifton Locey's home. Theoperator tried. There was no answer. He begged the operator to keep on tryingand to try every number he could think of, where Mr. Locey might be found.The operator promised and Mitchum hung up, but knew that it was useless towait or to speak to anyone in Mr. Locey's department.

"What's the matter, Dave?"

Mitchum handed him the order—and saw by the look on the trainmaster's facethat the trap was as bad as he had suspected.

He called the Region Headquarters of Taggart Transcontinental at Omaha,Nebraska, and begged to speak to the general manager of the region. There wasa brief silence on the wire, then the voice of the Omaha operator told himthat the general manager had resigned and vanished three days ago—"over alittle trouble with Mr. Locey," the voice added.

He asked to speak to the assistant general manager in charge of hisparticular district; but the assistant was out of town for the week end andcould not be reached.

"Get me somebody else!" Mitchum screamed. "Anybody, of any district! ForChrist's sake, get me somebody who'll tell me what to do!"

The man who came on the wire was the assistant general manager of theIowa-Minnesota District.

"What?" he interrupted at Mitchum's first words. "At Winston, Colorado?Why in hell are you calling me? . . . No, don't tell me what happened, Idon't want to know it! . . . No, I said! No! You're not going to frame meinto having to explain afterwards why I did or didn't do anything aboutwhatever it is. It's not my problem! . . . Speak to some region executive,don't pick on me, what do I have to do with Colorado? ... Oh hell, I don'tknow, get the chief engineer, speak to him!"

The chief engineer of the Central Region answered impatiently, "Yes? What?What is it?"—and Mitchum rushed desperately to explain. When the chiefengineer heard that there was no Diesel, he snapped, "Then hold the train, ofcourse!" When he heard about Mr.

Chalmers, he said, his voice suddenly subdued, "Hm . . . Kip Chalmers? OfWashington? . . . Well, I don't know. That would be a matter for Mr. Locey todecide." When Mitchum said, "Mr. Locey ordered me to arrange it, but—" thechief engineer snapped in great relief, "Then do exactly as Mr. Locey says!"and hung up.

Dave Mitchum replaced the telephone receiver cautiously. He did not screamany longer. Instead, he-tiptoed to a chair, almost as if he were sneaking. Hesat looking at Mr. Locey's order for a long time.

Then he snatched a glance about the room. The dispatcher was busy at histelephone. The trainmaster and the road foreman were there, but they

pretended that they were not waiting. He wished Bill Brent, the chiefdispatcher, would go home; Bill Brent stood in a corner, watching him.

Brent was a short, thin man with broad shoulders; he was forty, but lookedyounger; he had the pale face of an office worker and the hard, lean featuresof a cowboy. He was the best dispatcher on the system.

Mitchum rose abruptly and walked upstairs to his office, clutching Locey'sorder in his hand.

Dave Mitchum was not good at understanding problems of engineering andtransportation, but he understood men like Clifton Locey. He understood thekind of game the New York executives were playing and what they were nowdoing to him. The order did not tell him to give Mr. Chalmers a coal-burningengine—just "an engine." If the time came to answer questions, wouldn't Mr.Locey gasp in shocked indignation that he had expected a divisionsuperintendent to know that only a Diesel engine could be meant in thatorder? The order stated that he was to send the Comet through "safely"—wasn'ta division superintendent expected to know what was safe?—"and withoutunnecessary delay." What was an unnecessary delay? If the possibility of amajor disaster was involved, wouldn't a delay of a week or a month beconsidered necessary?

The New York executives did not care, thought Mitchum; they did not carewhether Mr. Chalmers reached his meeting on time, or whether an unprecedentedcatastrophe struck their rails; they cared only about making sure that theywould not be blamed for either. If he held the train, they would make him thescapegoat to appease the anger of Mr. Chalmers; if he sent the train throughand it did not reach the western portal of the tunnel, they would put theblame on his incompetence; they would claim that he had acted against theirorders, in either case. What would he be able to prove? To whom? One couldprove nothing to a tribunal that had no stated policy, no defined procedure,no rules of evidence, no binding principles—a tribunal, such as theUnification Board, that pronounced men guilty or innocent as it saw fit, withno standard of guilt or innocence.

Dave Mitchum knew nothing about the philosophy of law; but he knew thatwhen a court is not bound by any rules, it is not bound by any facts, andthen a hearing is not an issue of justice, but an issue of men, and your fatedepends not on what you have or have not done, but on whom you do or do notknow. He asked himself what chance he would have at such a hearing againstMr. James Taggart, Mr. Clifton Locey, Mr. Kip Chalmers and their powerfulfriends.

Dave Mitchum had spent his life slipping around the necessity of evermaking a decision; he had done it by waiting to be told and never beingcertain of anything. All that he now allowed into his brain was a long,indignant whine against injustice. Fate, he thought, had singled him out foran unfair amount of bad luck: he was being framed by his superiors on theonly good job he had ever held. He had never been taught to understand thatthe manner in which he obtained this job, and the frame-up, were inextricableparts of a single whole.

As he looked at Locey's order, he thought that he could hold the Comet,attach Mr. Chalmersl car to an engine and send it into the tunnel, alone. Buthe shook his head before the thought was fully formed: he knew that thiswould force Mr. Chalmers to recognize the nature of the risk; Mr. Chalmerswould refuse; he would continue to demand a safe and non-existent engine. Andmore: this would mean that he, Mitchum, would have to assume responsibility,admit full knowledge of the danger, stand in the open and identify the exactnature of the situation—the one act which the policy of his superiors wasbased on evading, the one key to their game.

Dave Mitchum was not the man to rebel against his background or toquestion the moral code of those in charge. The choice he made was not to

challenge, but to follow the policy of his superiors. Bill Brent could have-beaten him in any contest of technology, but here was an endeavor at which hecould beat Bill Brent without effort. There had once been a society where menneeded the particular talents of Bill Brent, if they wished to survive; whatthey needed now was the talent of Dave Mitchum.

Dave Mitchum sat down at his secretary's typewriter and, by means of twofingers, carefully typed out an order to the trainmaster and another to theroad foreman. The first instructed the trainmaster to summon a locomotivecrew at once, for a purpose described only as "an emergency"; the secondinstructed the road foreman to "send the best engine available to Winston, tostand by for emergency assistance."

He put carbon copies of the orders into his own pocket, then opened thedoor, yelled for the night dispatcher to come up and handed him the twoorders for the two men downstairs. The night dispatcher was a conscientiousyoung boy who trusted his superiors and knew that discipline was the firstrule of the railroad business. He was astonished that Mitchum should wish tosend written orders down one flight of stairs, but he asked no questions,Mitchum waited nervously. After a while, he saw the figure of the roadforeman walking across the yards toward the roundhouse. He felt relieved: thetwo men had not come up to confront him in person; they had understood andthey would play the game as he was playing it.

The road foreman walked across the yards, looking down at the ground. Hewas thinking of his wife, his two children and the house which he had spent alifetime to own. He knew what his superiors were doing and he wonderedwhether he should refuse to obey them. He had never been afraid of losing hisjob; with the confidence of a competent man, he had known that if hequarreled with one employer, he would always be able to find another. Now, hewas afraid; he had no right to quit or to seek a job; if he defied anemployer, he would be delivered into the unanswerable power of a singleBoard, and if the Board ruled against him, it would mean being sentenced tothe slow death of starvation: it would mean being barred from any employment.He knew that the Board would rule against him; he knew that the key to thedark, capricious mystery of the Board's contradictory decisions was thesecret power of pull. What chance would he have against Mr. Chalmers? Therehad been a time when the self-interest of his employers had demanded that heexercise his utmost ability.

Now, ability was not wanted any longer. There had been a time when he hadbeen required to do his best and rewarded accordingly. Now, he could expectnothing but punishment, if he tried to follow his conscience. There had beena time when he had been expected to think.

Now, they did not want him to think, only to obey. They did not want himto have a conscience any longer. Then why should he raise his voice? Forwhose sake? He thought of the passengers—the three hundred passengers aboardthe Comet. He thought of his children. He had a son in high school and adaughter, nineteen, of whom he was fiercely, painfully proud, because she wasrecognized as the most beautiful girl in town. He asked himself whether hecould deliver his children to the fate of the children of the unemployed, ashe had seen them in the blighted areas, in the settlements around closedfactories and along the tracks of discontinued railroads. He saw, inastonished horror, that the choice which he now had to make was between thelives of his children and the lives of the passengers on the Comet. Aconflict of this kind had never been possible before. It was by protectingthe safety of the passengers that he had earned the security of his children;he had served one by serving the other; there had been no clash of interests,no call for victims. Now, if he wanted to save the passengers, he had to doit at the price of his children.

He remembered dimly the sermons he had heard about the beauty of self-immolation, about the virtue of sacrificing to others that which was one'sdearest. He knew nothing about the philosophy of ethics; but he knewsuddenly—not in words, but in the form of a dark, angry, savage pain—that ifthis was virtue, then he wanted no part of it.

He walked into the roundhouse and ordered a large, ancient coal burninglocomotive to be made ready for the run to Winston.

The trainmaster reached for the telephone in the dispatcher's office, tosummon an engine crew, as ordered. But his hand stopped, holding thereceiver. It struck him suddenly that he was summoning men to their death,and that of the twenty lives listed on the sheet before him, two would beended by his choice. He felt a physical sensation of cold, nothing more; hefelt no concern, only a puzzled, indifferent astonishment. It had never beenhis job to call men out to die; his job had been to call them out to earntheir living. It was strange, he thought; and it was strange that his handhad stopped; what made it stop was like something he would have felt twentyyears ago—no, he thought, strange, only one month ago, not longer.

He was forty-eight years old. He had no family, no friends, no ties to anyliving being in the world. Whatever capacity for devotion he had possessed,the capacity which others scatter among many random concerns, he had given itwhole to the person of his young brother —the brother, his junior by twenty-five years, whom he had brought up. He had sent him through a technologicalcollege, and he had known, as had all the teachers, that the boy had the markof genius on the forehead of his grim, young face. With the same single-tracked devotion as his brother's, the boy had cared for nothing but hisstudies, not for sports or parties or girls, only for the vision of thethings he was going to create as an inventor. He had graduated from collegeand had gone, on a salary unusual for his age, into the research laboratoryof a great electrical concern in Massachusetts.

This was now May 28, thought the trainmaster. It was on May 1

that Directive 10-289 had been issued. It was on the evening of May I thathe had been informed that his brother had committed suicide.

The trainmaster had heard it said that the directive was necessary to savethe country. He could not know whether this was true or not; he had no way ofknowing what was necessary to save a country. But driven by some feelingwhich he could not express, he had walked into the office of the editor ofthe local newspaper and demanded that they publish the story of his brother'sdeath. "People have to know it," had been all he could give as his reason. Hehad been unable to explain that the bruised connections of his mind hadformed the wordless conclusion that if this was done by the will of thepeople, then the people had to know it; he could not believe that they woulddo it, if they knew. The editor had refused; he had stated that it would bebad for the country's morale.

The trainmaster knew nothing about political philosophy; but he knew thatthat had been the moment when he lost all concern for the life or death ofany human being or of the country.

He thought, holding the telephone receiver, that maybe he should warn themen whom he was about to call. They trusted him; it would never occur to themthat he could knowingly send them to their death.

But he shook his head: this was only an old thought, last year's thought,a remnant of the time when he had trusted them, too. It did not matter now.His brain worked slowly, as if he were dragging his thoughts through a vacuumwhere no emotion responded to spur them on; he thought that there would betrouble if he warned anyone, there would be some sort of fight and it was hewho had to make some great effort to start it. He had forgotten what it wasthat one started this sort of fight for. Truth? Justice? Brother-love? He didnot want to make an effort. He was very tired. If he warned all the men on

his list, he thought, there would be no one to run that engine, so he wouldsave two lives and also three hundred lives aboard the Comet.

But nothing responded to the figures in his mind; "lives" was just a word,it had no meaning.

He raised the telephone receiver to his ear, he called two numbers, hesummoned an engineer and a fireman to report for duty at once.

Engine Number 30 6 had left for Winston, when Dave Mitchum came downstairs."Get a track motor car ready for me," he ordered, "I'm going to run up toFairmount." Fairmount was a small station, twenty miles east on the line. Themen nodded, asking no questions. Bill Brent was not among them. Mitchumwalked into Brent's office. Brent was there, sitting silently at his desk; heseemed to be waiting.

"I'm going to Fairmount," said Mitchum; his voice was aggressively toocasual, as if implying that no answer was necessary. "They had a Diesel therecouple of weeks ago . . . you know, emergency repairs or something. . . .I'mgoing down to see if we could use it."

He paused, but Brent said nothing.

"The way things stack up," said Mitchum, not looking at him, "we can'thold that train till morning. We've got to take a chance, one way or another.Now I think maybe this Diesel will do it, but that's the last one we can tryfor. So if you don't hear from me in half an hour, sign the order and sendthe Comet through with Number 30 6 to pull her."

Whatever Brent had thought, he could not believe it when he heard it. Hedid not answer at once; then he said, very quietly, "No."

"What do you mean, no?"

"I won't do it."

"What do you mean, you won't? It's an order!"

"I won't do it." Brent's voice had the firmness of certainty unclouded byany emotion.

"Are you refusing to obey an order?""I am."

"But you have no right to refuse! And I'm not going to argue about it,either. It's what I've decided, it's my responsibility and I'm not asking foryour opinion. Your job is to take my orders."

"Will you give me that order in writing?"

"Why, God damn you, are you hinting that you don't trust me? Are you . . .

? "

"Why do you have to go to Fairmount, Dave? Why can't you telephone themabout that Diesel, if you think that they have one?"

"You're not going to tell me how to do my job! You're not going to sitthere and question me! You're going to keep your trap shut and do as you'retold or I'll give you a chance to talk—to the Unification Board!"

It was hard to decipher emotions on Brent's cowboy face, but Mitchum sawsomething that resembled a look of incredulous horror; only it was horror atsome sight of his own, not at the words, and it had no quality of fear, notthe kind of fear Mitchum had hoped for.

Brent knew that tomorrow morning the issue would be his word againstMitchum's; Mitchum would deny having given the order; Mitchum would showwritten proof that Engine Number 306 had been sent to Winston only "to standby," and would produce witnesses that he had gone to Fairmount in search of aDiesel; Mitchum would claim that the fatal order had been issued by and onthe sole responsibility of Bill Brent, the chief dispatcher, it would not bemuch of a case, not a case that could bear close study, but it would beenough for the Unification Board, whose policy was consistent only in notpermitting anything to be studied closely. Brent knew that he could play thesame game and pass the frame-up on to another victim, he knew that he had thebrains to work it out—except that he would rather be dead than do it.

It was not the sight of Mitchum that made him sit still in horror.

It was the realization that there was no one whom he could call to exposethis thing and stop it—no superior anywhere on the line, from Colorado toOmaha to New York. They were in on it, all of them, they were doing the same,they had given Mitchum the lead and the method. It was Dave Mitchum who nowbelonged on this railroad and he, Bill Brent, who did not.

As Bill Brent had learned to see, by a single glance at a few numbers on asheet of paper, the entire trackage of a division—so he was now able to seethe whole of his own life and the full price of the decision he was making.He had not fallen in love until he was past his youth; he had been thirty-sixwhen he had found the woman he wanted. He had been engaged to her for thelast four years; he had had to wait, because he had a mother to support and awidowed sister with three children. He had never been afraid of burdens,because he had known his ability to carry them, and he had never assumed anobligation unless he was certain that he could fulfill it. He had waited, hehad saved his money, and now he had reached the time when he felt himselffree to be happy. He was to be married in a few weeks, this coming June. Hethought of it, as he sat at his desk, looking at Dave Mitchum, but thethought aroused no hesitation, only regret and a distant sadness—distant,because he knew that he could not let it be part of this moment.

Bill Brent knew nothing about epistemology; but he knew that man must liveby his own rational perception of reality, that he cannot act against it orescape it or find a substitute for it—and that there is no other way for himto live.

He rose to his feet. "It's true that so long as I hold this job, I cannotrefuse to obey you," he said. "But I can, if I quit. So I'm quitting.""You're what?"

"I'm quitting, as of this moment."

"But you have no right to quit, you goddamn bastard! Don't you know that?Don't you know that I'll have you thrown in jail for it?"

"If you want to send the sheriff for me in the morning, I'll be at home. Iwon't try to escape. There's no place to go."

Dave Mitchum was six-foot-two and had the build of a bruiser, but he stoodshaking with fury and terror over the delicate figure of Bill Brent. "Youcan't quit! There's a law against it! I've got a law! You can't walk out onme! I won't let you out! I won't let you leave this building tonight!"

Brent walked to the door. "Will you repeat that order you gave me, infront of the others? No? Then I will!"

As he pulled the door open, Mitchum's fist shot out, smashed into his faceand knocked him down.

The trainmaster and the road foreman stood in the open doorway.

"He quit!" screamed Mitchum. "The yellow bastard quit at a time like this!He's a law-breaker and a coward!"

In the slow effort of rising from the floor, through the haze of bloodrunning into his eyes, Bill Brent looked up at the two men. He saw that theyunderstood, but he saw the closed faces of men who did not want tounderstand, did not want to interfere and hated him for putting them on thespot in the name of justice. He said nothing, rose to his feet and walked outof the building.

Mitchum avoided looking at the others. "Hey, you," he called, jerking hishead at the night dispatcher across the room. "Come here.You've got to take over at once."

With the door closed, he repeated to the boy the story of the Diesel atFairmount, as he had given it to Brent, and the order to send the Cometthrough with Engine Number 306, if the boy did not hear from him in half anhour. The boy was in no condition to think, to speak or to understandanything: he kept seeing the blood on the face of Bill Brent, who had been

his idol. "Yes, sir," he answered numbly Dave Mitchum departed for Fairmount,announcing to every yardman, switchman and wiper in sight, as he boarded thetrack motor car that he was going in search of a Diesel for the Comet.

The night dispatcher sat at his desk, watching the clock and thetelephone, praying that the telephone would ring and let him hear from Mr.Mitchum. But the half-hour went by in silence, and whet there were only threeminutes left, the boy felt a terror he could not explain, except that he didnot want to send that order, He turned to the trainmaster and the roadforeman, asking hesitantly, "Mr. Mitchum gave me an order before he left, butI wonder whether I ought to send it, because I ... I don't think it'sright. He said—"

The trainmaster turned away; he felt no pity: the boy was about the sameage as his brother had been.

The road foreman snapped, "Do just as Mr. Mitchum told you.

You're not supposed to think," and walked out of the room.

The responsibility that James Taggart and Clifton Locey had evaded nowrested on the shoulders of a trembling, bewildered boy. He hesitated, then hebuttressed his courage with the thought that one did not doubt the good faithand the competence of railroad executives. He did not know that his vision ofa railroad and its executives was that of a century ago.

With the conscientious precision of a railroad man, in the moment when thehand of the clock ended the half-hour, he signed his name to the orderinstructing the Comet to proceed with Engine Number 306, and transmitted theorder to Winston Station.

The station agent at Winston shuddered when he looked at the order, but hewas not the man to defy authority. He told himself that the tunnel was not,perhaps, as dangerous as he thought. He told himself that the best policy,these days, was not to think.

When he handed their copies of the order to the conductor and the engineerof the Comet, the conductor glanced slowly about the room, from face to face,folded the slip of paper, put it into his pocket and walked out without aword.

The engineer stood looking at the paper for a moment, then threw it downand said, "I'm not going to do it. And if it's come to where this railroadhands out orders like this one, I'm not going to work for it, either. Justlist me as having quit."

"But you can't quit!" cried the station agent, "They'll arrest you forit! "

"If they find me," said the engineer, and walked out of the station intothe vast darkness of the mountain night.

The engineer from Silver Springs, who had brought in Number 306, wassitting in a corner of the room. He chuckled and said, "He's yellow."

The station agent turned to him. "Will you do it, Joe? Will you take theComet?"

Joe Scott was drunk. There had been a time when a railroad man, reportingfor duty with any sign of intoxication, would have been regarded as a doctorarriving for work with sores of smallpox on his face.

But Joe Scott was a privileged person. Three months ago, he had been firedfor an infraction of safety rules, which had caused a major wreck; two weeksago, he had been reinstated in his job by order of the Unification Board. Hewas a friend of Fred Kinnan; he protected Rinnan's interests in his union,not against the employers, but against the membership.

"Sure," said Joe Scott. "I'll take the Comet. I'll get her through, if Igo fast enough."

The fireman of Number 30 6 had remained in the cab of his engine.He looked up uneasily, when they came to switch his engine to the head endof the Comet; he looked up at the red and green lights of the tunnel, hanging

in the distance above twenty miles of curves. But he was a placid, amicablefellow, who made a good fireman with no hope of ever rising to engineer; hishusky muscles were his only asset.

He felt certain that his superiors knew what they were doing, so he didnot venture any questions.

The conductor stood by the rear end of the Comet. He looked at the lightsof the tunnel, then at the long chain of the Comet's windows. A few windowswere lighted, but most of them showed only the feeble blue glow of nightlamps edging the lowered blinds. He thought that he should rouse thepassengers and warn them. There had been a time when he had placed the safetyof the passengers above his own, not by reason of love for his fellow men,but because that responsibility was part of his job, which he accepted andfelt pride in fulfilling. Now, he felt a contemptuous indifference and nodesire to save them. They had asked for and accepted Directive 10-289, hethought, they went on living and daily turning away in evasion from the kindof verdicts that the Unification Board was passing on defenseless victims—whyshouldn't he now turn away from them? If he saved their lives, not one ofthem would come forward to defend him when the Unification Board wouldconvict him for disobeying orders, for creating a panic, for delaying Mr.Chalmers. He had no desire to be a martyr for the sake of allowing peoplesafely to indulge in their own irresponsible evil.

When the moment came, he raised his lantern and signaled the engineer tostart.

"See?" said Kip Chalmers triumphantly to Lester Tuck, as the wheels undertheir feet shuddered forward. "Fear is the only practical means to deal withpeople. "

The conductor stepped onto the vestibule of the last car. No one saw himas he went down the steps of the other side, slipped off the train andvanished into the darkness of the mountains.

A switchman stood ready to throw the switch that would send the Comet fromthe siding onto the main track. He looked at the Comet as it came slowlytoward him. It was only a blazing white globe with a beam stretching highabove his head, and a jerky thunder trembling through the rail under hisfeet. He knew that the switch should not be thrown. He thought of the night,ten years ago, when he had risked his life in a flood to save a train from awashout. But he knew that times had changed. In the moment when he threw theswitch and saw the headlight jerk sidewise, he knew that he would now hatehis job for the rest of his life.

The Comet uncoiled from the siding into a thin, straight line, and went oninto the mountains, with the beam of the headlight like an extended armpointing the way, and the lighted glass curve of the observation loungeending it off.

Some of the passengers aboard the Comet were awake. As the train startedits coiling ascent, they saw the small cluster of Winston's lights at thebottom of the darkness beyond their windows, then the same darkness, but withred and green lights by the hole of a tunnel on the upper edge of thewindowpanes. The lights of Winston kept growing smaller, each time theyappeared; the black hole of the tunnel kept growing larger. A black veil wentstreaking past the windows at times, dimming the lights: it was the heavysmoke from the coal-burning engine.

As the tunnel came closer, they saw, on the edge of the sky far to thesouth, in a void of space and rock, a spot of living fire twisting in thewind. They did not know what it was and did not care to learn.

It is said that catastrophes are a matter of pure chance, and there werethose who would have said that the passengers of the Comet were not guilty orresponsible for the thing that happened to them.

The man in Bedroom A, Car No. 1, was a professor of sociology who taughtthat individual ability is of no consequence, that individual effort isfutile, that an individual conscience is a useless luxury, that there is noindividual mind or character or achievement, that everything is achievedcollectively, and that it's masses that count, not men.

The man in Roomette 7, Car No. 2, was a journalist who wrote that it isproper and moral to use compulsion "for a good cause," who believed that hehad the right to unleash physical force upon others—

to wreck lives, throttle ambitions, strangle desires, violate convictions,to imprison, to despoil, to murder—for the sake of whatever he chose toconsider as his own idea of "a good cause," which did not even have to be anidea, since he had never defined what he regarded as the good, but had merelystated that he went by "a feeling"—a feeling unrestrained by any knowledge,since he considered emotion superior to knowledge and relied solely on hisown "good intentions" and on the power of a gun.

The woman in Roomette 10, Car No. 3, was an elderly schoolteacher who hadspent her life turning class after class of helpless children into miserablecowards, by teaching them that the will of the majority is the only standardof good and evil, that a majority may do anything it pleases, that they mustnot assert their own personalities, but must do as others were doing.

The man in Drawing Room B, Car No, 4, was a newspaper publisher whobelieved that men are evil by nature and unfit for freedom, that their basicinstincts, if left unchecked, are to lie, to rob and to murder one another—and, therefore, men must be ruled by means of lies, robbery and murder, whichmust be made the exclusive privilege of the rulers, for the purpose offorcing men to work, teaching them to be moral and keeping them within thebounds of order and justice.

The man in Bedroom H, Car No. 5, was a businessman who had acquired hisbusiness, an ore mine, with the help of a government loan, under theEqualization of Opportunity Bill.

The man in Drawing Room A, Car No. 6, was a financier who had made afortune by buying "frozen" railroad bonds and getting his friends inWashington to "defreeze" them.

The man in Seat 5, Car No, 7, was a worker who believed that he had "aright" to a job, whether his employer wanted him or not.

The woman in Roomette 6, Car No. 8, was a lecturer who believed that, as aconsumer, she had "a right" to transportation, whether the railroad peoplewished to provide it or not.

The man in Roomette 2, Car No. 9, was a professor of economics whoadvocated the abolition of private property, explaining that intelligenceplays no part in industrial production, that man's mind is conditioned bymaterial tools, that anybody can run a factory or a railroad and it's only amatter of seizing the machinery.

The woman in Bedroom D, Car No. 10, was a mother who had put her twochildren to sleep in the berth above her, carefully tucking them in,protecting them from drafts and jolts; a mother whose husband held agovernment job enforcing directives, which she defended by saying, "I don'tcare, it's only the rich that they hurt. After all, I must think of mychildren."

The man in Roomette 3, Car No. 11, was a sniveling little neurotic whowrote cheap little plays into which, as a social message, he insertedcowardly little obscenities to the effect that all businessmen werescoundrels.

The woman in Roomette 9, Car No. 12, was a housewife who believed that shehad the right to elect politicians, of whom she knew nothing, to controlgiant industries, of which she had no knowledge.

The man in Bedroom F, Car No. 13, was a lawyer who had said, "Me? I'llfind a way to get along under any political system."

The man in Bedroom A, Car No. 14, was a professor of philosophy who taughtthat there is no mind—how do you know that the tunnel is dangerous?—noreality—how can you prove that the tunnel exists?—

no logic—why do you claim that trains cannot move without motive power?—noprinciples—why should you be bound by the law of cause and-effect?—no rights-why shouldn't you attach men to their jobs by force?—no morality—what's moralabout running a railroad?—no absolutes—what difference does it make to youwhether you live or die, anyway? He taught that we know nothing—why opposethe orders of your superiors?—that we can never be certain of anything—how doyou know you're right?—that we must act on the expediency of the moment—youdon't want to risk your job, do you?

The man in Drawing Room B, Car No. 15, was an heir who had inherited hisfortune, and who had kept repeating, "Why should Rearden be the only onepermitted to manufacture Rearden Metal?"

The man in Bedroom A, Car No. 16, was a humanitarian who had said, "Themen of ability? I do not care what or if they are made to suffer. They mustbe penalized in order to support the incompetent.

Frankly, I do not care whether this is just or not. I take pride in notcaring to grant any justice to the able, where mercy to the needy isconcerned."

These passengers were awake; there was not a man aboard the train who didnot share one or more of their ideas. As the train went into the tunnel, theflame of Wyatt's Torch was the last thing they saw on earth.

CHAPTER VIIIBY OUR LOVE

The sun touched the tree tops on the slope of the hill, and they looked abluish-silver, catching the color of the sky. Dagny stood at the door of thecabin, with the first sunrays on her forehead and miles of forest spreadunder her feet. The leaves went down from silver to green to the smoky blueof the shadows on the road below. The light trickled down through thebranches and shot upward in sudden spurts when it hit a clump of ferns thatbecame a fountain of green rays. It gave her pleasure to watch the motion ofthe light over a stillness where nothing else could move.

She had marked the date, as she did each morning, on the sheet of papershe had tacked to the wall of her room. The progression of the dates on thatpaper was the only movement in the stillness of her days, like the recordkept by a prisoner on a desert island. This morning's date was May 28.

She had intended the dates to lead to a purpose, but she could not saywhether she had reached it or not. She had come here with three assignmentsgiven, as orders, to herself: rest—learn to live without the railroad—get thepain out of the way. Get it out of the way, were the words she used. She feltas if she were tied to some wounded stranger who could be stricken at anymoment by an attack that would drown her in his screams. She felt no pity forthe stranger, only a contemptuous impatience; she had to fight him anddestroy him, then her way would be clear to decide what she wished to do; butthe stranger was not easy to fight.

The assignment to rest had been easier. She found that she liked thesolitude; she awakened in the morning with a feeling of confidentbenevolence, the sense that she could venture forth and be willing to dealwith whatever she found. In the city, she had lived in chronic tension towithstand the shock of anger, indignation, disgust, contempt.

The only danger to threaten her here was the simple pain of some physicalaccident; it seemed innocent and easy by comparison, The cabin was far fromany traveled road; it had remained as her father had left it. She cooked hermeals on a wood-burning stove and gathered the wood on the hillsides. Shecleared the brush from under her walls, she reshingled the roof, sherepainted the door and the frames of the windows. Rains, weeds and brush hadswallowed the steps of what had once been a terraced path rising up the hillfrom the road to the cabin. She rebuilt it, clearing the terraces, re-layingthe stones, bracing the banks of soft earth with walls of boulders. It gaveher pleasure to devise complex systems of levers and pulleys out of oldscraps of iron and rope, then to move weights of rock that were much beyondher physical power. She planted a few seeds of nasturtiums and morningglories, to see one spreading slowly over the ground and the other climbingup the tree trunks, to see them grow, to see progression and movement.

The work gave her the calm she needed; she had not noticed how she beganit or why; she had started without conscious intention, but she saw itgrowing under her hands, pulling her forward, giving her a healing sense ofpeace. Then she understood that what she needed was the motion to a purpose,no matter how small or in what form, the sense of an activity going step bystep to some chosen end across a span of time. The work of cooking a meal waslike a closed circle, completed and gone, leading nowhere. But the work ofbuilding a path was a living sum, so that no day was left to die behind her,but each day contained all those that preceded it, each day acquired itsimmortality on every succeeding tomorrow. A circle, she thought, is themovement proper to physical nature, they say that there's nothing butcircular motion in the inanimate universe around us, but the straight line isthe badge of man, the straight line of a geometrical abstraction that makes

roads, rails and bridges, the straight line that cuts the curving aimlessnessof nature by a purposeful motion from a start to an end.

The cooking of meals, she thought, is like the feeding of coal to anengine for the sake of a great run, but what would be the imbecile torture ofcoaling an engine that had no run to make? It is not proper for man's life tobe a circle, she thought, or a string of circles dropping off like zerosbehind him—man's life must be a straight line of motion from goal to farthergoal, each leading to the next and to a single growing sum, like a journeydown the track of a railroad, from station to station to—oh, stop it!

Stop it—she told herself in quiet severity, when the scream of the woundedstranger was choked off—don't think of that, don't look too far, you likebuilding this path, build it, don't look beyond the foot of the hill.

She had driven a few times to the store in Woodstock, twenty miles away,to buy supplies and food. Woodstock was a small huddle of dying structures,built generations ago for some reason and hope long since forgotten. Therewas no railroad to feed it, no electric power, nothing but a county highwaygrowing emptier year by year.

The only store was a wooden hovel, with spider-eaten corners and a rottedpatch in the middle of the floor, eaten by the rains that came through theleaking roof. The storekeeper was a fat, pallid woman who moved with effort,but seemed indifferent to her own discomfort. The stock of food consisted ofdusty cans with faded labels, some grain, and a few vegetables rotting inancient bins outside the door. "Why don't you move those vegetables out ofthe sun?" Dagny asked once. The woman looked at her blankly, as if unable tounderstand the possibility of such a question. "They've always been there,"she answered indifferently.

Driving back to the cabin, Dagny looked up at a mountain stream that fellwith ferocious force down a sheer granite wall, its spray hanging like a mistof rainbows in the sun. She thought that one could build a hydroelectricplant, just large enough to supply the power for her cabin and for the townof Woodstock—Woodstock could be made to be productive—those wild apple treesshe saw in such unusual numbers among the dense growth on the hillsides, werethe remnants of orchards—suppose one were to reclaim them, then build a smallspur to the nearest railroad—oh, stop it!

"No kerosene today, " the storekeeper told her on her next trip toWoodstock. "It rained Thursday night, and when it rains, the trucks can't getthrough Fairfield gorge, the road's flooded, and the kerosene truck won't beback this way till next month." "If you know that the road gets flooded everytime it rains, why don't you people repair it?"

The woman answered, "The road's always been that way."

Driving back, Dagny stopped on the crest of a hill and looked down at themiles of countryside below. She looked at Fairfield gorge where the countyroad, twisting through marshy soil below the level of a river, got trapped ina crack between two hills. It would be simple to bypass those hills, shethought, to build a road on the other side of the river—the people ofWoodstock had nothing to do, she could teach them—cut a road straight to thesouthwest, save miles, connect with the state highway at the freight depotof—oh, stop it!

She put her kerosene lamp aside and sat in her cabin after dark by thelight of a candle, listening to the music of a small portable radio.

She hunted for symphony concerts and twisted the dial rapidly pastwhenever she caught the raucous syllables of a news broadcast; she did notwant any news from the city.

Don't think of Taggart Transcontinental—she had told herself on her firstnight in the cabin—don't think of it until you're able to hear the words asif they were "Atlantic Southern" or "Associated Steel," But the weeks passedand no scar would grow over the wound.

It seemed to her as if she were fighting the unpredictable cruelty of herown mind. She would lie in bed, drifting off to sleep—then find herselfsuddenly thinking that the conveyor belt was worn at the coaling station atWillow Bend, Indiana, she had seen it from the window of her car on her lasttrip, she must tell them to replace it or they—

and then she would be sitting up in bed, crying, Stop it!—and stopping it,but remaining awake for the rest of that night.

She would sit at the door of the cabin at sunset and watch the motion ofthe leaves growing still in the twilight—then she would see the sparks of thefireflies rising from the grass, flashing on and off in every darkeningcorner, flashing slowly, as if holding one moment's warning—they were likethe lights of signals winking at night over the track of a—Stop it!

It was the times when she could not stop it that she dreaded, the timeswhen, unable to stand up—as in physical pain, with no limit to divide it fromthe pain of her mind—she would fall down on the floor of the cabin or on theearth of the woods and sit still, with her face pressed to a chair or a rock,and fight not to let herself scream aloud, while they were suddenly as closeto her and as real as the body of a lover: the two lines of rail going off toa single point in the distance—the front of an engine cutting space apart bymeans of the letters TT—the sound of the wheels clicking in accented rhythmunder the floor of her car—the statue of Nat Taggart in the concourse of theTerminal. Fighting not to know them, not to feel them, her body rigid but forthe grinding motion of her face against her arm, she would draw whateverpower over her consciousness still remained to her into the soundless,toneless repetition of the words: Get it over with, There were long stretchesof calm, when she was able to face her problem with the dispassionate clarityof weighing a problem in engineering. But she could find no answer. She knewthat her desperate longing for the railroad would vanish, were she toconvince herself that it was impossible or improper. But the longing camefrom the certainty that the truth and the right were hers—that the enemy wasthe irrational and the unreal—that she could not set herself another goal orsummon the love to achieve it, while her rightful achievement had been lost,not to some superior power, but to a loathsome evil that conquered by meansof impotence.

She could renounce the railroad, she thought; she could find contentmenthere, in this forest; but she would build the path, then reach the roadbelow, then rebuild the road—and then she would reach the storekeeper ofWoodstock and that would be the end, and the empty white face staring at theuniverse in stagnant apathy would be the limit placed on her effort. Why?—sheheard herself screaming aloud, There was no answer.

Then stay here until you answer it, she thought. You have no place to go,you can't move, you can't start grading a right-of-way until . . .

until you know enough to choose a terminal.

There were long, silent evenings when the emotion that made her sit stilland look at the unattainable distance beyond the fading light to the south,was loneliness for Hank Rearden. She wanted the sight of his unyielding face,the confident face looking at her with the hint of a smile. But she knew thatshe could not see him until her battle was won. His smile had to be deserved,it was intended for an adversary who traded her strength against his, not fora pain-beaten wretch who would seek relief in that smile and thus destroy itsmeaning. He could help her to live; he could not help her to decide for whatpurpose she wished to go on living.

She had felt a faint touch of anxiety since the morning when she marked"May 15" on her calendar. She had forced herself to listen to newsbroadcasts, once in a while; she had heard no mention of his name. Her fearfor him was her last link to the city; it kept drawing her eyes to thehorizon at the south and down to the road at the foot of the hill. She found

herself waiting for him to come. She found herself listening for the sound ofa motor. But the only sound to give her a futile start of hope at times, wasthe sudden crackle of some large bird's wings hurtling through the branchesinto the sky.

There was another link to the past, that still remained as an unsolvedquestion: Quentin Daniels and the motor that he was trying to rebuild.

By June 1, she would owe him his monthly check. Should she tell him thatshe had quit, that she would never need that motor and neither would theworld? Should she tell him to stop and to let the remnant of the motor vanishin rust on some such junk pile as the one where she had found it? She couldnot force herself to do it. It seemed harder than leaving the railroad. Thatmotor, she thought, was not a link to the past: it was her last link to thefuture. To kill it seemed like an act, not of murder, but of suicide: herorder to stop it would be her signature under the certainty that there was noterminal for her to seek ahead.

But it is not true—she thought, as she stood at the door of her cabin, onthis morning of May 28—it is not true that there is no place in the futurefor a superlative achievement of man's mind; it can never be true. No matterwhat her problem, this would always remain to her—this immovable convictionthat evil was unnatural and temporary. She felt it more clearly than everthis morning: the certainty that the ugliness of the men in the city and theugliness of her suffering were transient accidents—while the smiling sense ofhope within her at the sight of a sun-flooded forest, the sense of anunlimited promise, was the permanent and the real.

She stood at the door, smoking a cigarette. In the room behind her, thesounds of a symphony of her grandfather's time were coming from the radio.She barely listened, she was conscious only of the flow of chords that seemedto play an underscoring harmony for the flow of the smoke curving slowly fromher cigarette, for the curving motion of her arm moving the cigarette to herlips once in a while. She closed her eyes and stood still, feeling the raysof the sun on her body. This was the achievement, she thought—to enjoy thismoment, to let no memory of pain blunt her capacity to feel as she felt rightnow; so long as she could preserve this feeling, she would have the fuel togo on.

She was barely aware of a faint noise that came through the music, likethe scratching of an old record. The first thing to reach her consciousnesswas the sudden jerk of her own hand flinging the cigarette aside. It came inthe same instant as the realization that the noise was growing loader andthat it was the sound of a motor. Then she knew that she had not admitted toherself how much she had wanted to hear that sound, how desperately she hadwaited for Hank Rearden.

She heard her own chuckle—it was humbly, cautiously low, as if not todisturb the drone of revolving metal which was now the unmistakable sound ofa car rising up the mountain road.

She could not see the road—the small stretch under the arch of branches atthe foot of the hill was her only view of it—but she watched the car's ascentby the growing, imperious strain of the motor against the grades and thescreech of the tires on curves.

The car stopped under the arch of branches. She did not recognize it —itwas not the black Hammond, but a long, gray convertible. She saw the driverstep out: it was a man whose presence here could not be possible. It wasFrancisco d'Anconia.

The shock she felt was not disappointment, it was more like the sensationthat disappointment would now be irrelevant. It was eagerness and an odd,solemn stillness, the sudden certainty that she was facing the approach ofsomething unknown and of the gravest importance.

The swiftness of Francisco's movements was carrying him toward the hillwhile he was raising his head to glance up. He saw her above, at the door ofthe cabin, and stopped. She could not distinguish the expression on his face.He stood still for a long moment, his face raised to her. Then he started upthe hill.

She felt—almost as if she had expected it—that this was a scene from theirchildhood. He was coming toward her, not running, but moving upward with akind of triumphant, confident eagerness. No, she thought, this was not theirchildhood—it was the future as she would have seen it then, in the days whenshe waited for him as for her release from prison. It was a moment's view ofa morning they would have reached, if her vision of life had been fulfilled,if they had both gone the way she had then been so certain of going. Heldmotionless by wonder, she stood looking at him, taking this moment, not inthe name of the present, but as a salute to their past.

When he was close enough and she could distinguish his face, she saw thelook of that luminous gaiety which transcends the solemn by proclaiming thegreat innocence of a man who has earned the right to be light-hearted. He wassmiling and whistling some piece of music that seemed to flow like the long,smooth, rising flight of his steps.

The melody seemed distantly familiar to her, she felt that it belongedwith this moment, yet she felt also that there was something odd about it,something important to grasp, only she could not think of it now.

"Hi, Slug!"

"Hi, Frisco!"

She knew—by the way he looked at her, by an instant's drop of his eyelidsclosing his eyes, by the brief pull of his head striving to lean back andresist, by the faint, half-smiling, half-helpless relaxation of his lips,then by the sudden harshness of his arms as he seized her—

that it was involuntary, that he had not intended it, and that it wasirresistibly right for both of them.

The desperate violence of the way he held her, the hurting pressure of hismouth on hers, the exultant surrender of his body to the touch of hers, werenot the form of a moment's pleasure— she knew that no physical hunger couldbring a man to this—she knew that it was the statement she had never heardfrom him, the greatest confession of love a man could make. No matter what hehad done to wreck his life, this was still the Francisco d'Anconia in whosebed she had been so proud of belonging—no matter what betrayals she had metfrom the world, her vision of life had been true and some indestructible partof it had remained within him—and in answer to it, her body responded to his,her arms and mouth held him, confessing her desire, confessing anacknowledgment she had always given him and always would.

Then the rest of his years came back to her, with a stab of the pain ofknowing that the greater his person, the more terrible his guilt hidestroying it. She pulled herself away from him, she shook her head, shesaid, in answer to both of them, "No."

He stood looking at her, disarmed and smiling. "Not yet. You have a greatdeal to forgive me, first. But I can tell you everything now."

She had never heard that low, breathless quality of helplessness in hisvoice. He was fighting to regain control, there was almost a touch of apologyin his smile, the apology of a child pleading for indulgence, but there wasalso an adult's amusement, the laughing declaration that he did not have tohide his struggle, since it was happiness that he was wrestling with, notpain.

She backed away from him; she felt as if emotion had flung her ahead ofher own consciousness, and questions were now catching up with her, gropingtoward the form of words.'

"Dagny, that torture you've been going through, here, for the last month .. . answer me as honestly as you can ... do you think you could have borneit twelve years ago?"

"No," she answered; he smiled. "Why do you ask that?"

"To redeem twelve years of my life, which I won't have to regret."

"What do you mean? And"—her questions had caught up with her—"and what doyou know about my torture here?"

"Dagny, aren't you beginning to see that I would know everything aboutit?"

"How did you . . . Francisco! What were you whistling when you were comingup the hill?"

"Why, was I? I don't know."

"It was the Fifth Concerto by Richard Halley, wasn't it?"

"Oh . . . ]" He looked startled, then smiled in amusement at himself, thenanswered gravely, "I'll tell you that later.""How did you find out where I was?""I'll tell you that, too.""You forced it out of Eddie.""I haven't seen Eddie for over a year.""He was the only one who knew it.""It wasn't Eddie who told me.""I didn't want anybody to find me."

He glanced slowly about him, she saw his eyes stop on the path she hadbuilt, on the planted flowers, on the fresh-shingled roof. He chuckled, as ifhe understood and as if it hurt him. "You shouldn't have been left here for amonth," he said. "God, you shouldn't have! It's my first failure, at the onetime when I didn't want to fail. But I didn't think you were ready to quit.Had I known it, I would have watched you day and night."

"Really? What for?"

"To spare you"—he pointed at her work—"all this."

"Francisco," she said, her voice low, "if you're concerned about mytorture, don't you know that I don't want to hear you speak of it, because—"She stopped; she had never complained to him, not in all those years; hervoice flat, she 'said only, "—that I don't want to hear it?"

"Because I'm the one man who has no right to speak of it? Dagny, if youthink that I don't know how much I've hurt you, I'll tell you about the yearswhen I . . . But it's over. Oh, darling, it's over!"

"Is it?"

"Forgive me, I mustn't say that. Not until you say it," He was trying tocontrol his voice, but the look of happiness was beyond his power of control.

"Are you happy because I've lost everything I lived for? All right, I'llsay it, if this is what you've come to hear: you were the first thing I lost-does it amuse you now to see that I've lost the rest?"

He glanced straight at her, his eyes drawn narrow by such an intensity ofearnestness that the glance was almost a threat, and she knew that whateverthe years had meant to him, "amusement" was the one word she had no right toutter.

"Do you really think that?" he asked.She whispered, "No . . ."

"Dagny, we can never lose the things we live for. We may have to changetheir form at times, if we've made an error, but the purpose remains the sameand the forms are ours to make."

"'That is what I've been telling myself for a month. But there's no wayleft open toward any purpose whatever."

He did not answer. He sat down on a boulder by the door of the cabin,watching her as if he did not want to miss a single shadow of reaction on herface. "What do you think now of the men who quit and vanished?" he asked.

She shrugged, with a faint smile of helpless sadness, and sat down on theground beside him. "You know," she said, "I used to think that there was somedestroyer who came after them and made them quit.

But I guess there wasn't. There have been times, this past month, whenI've almost wished he would come for me, too. But nobody came."

"No?"

"No. I used to think that he gave them some inconceivable reason to makethem betray everything they loved. But that wasn't necessary.

I know how they felt. I can't blame them any longer. What I don't know ishow they learned to exist afterward—if any of them still exist."

"Do you feel that you've betrayed Taggart Transcontinental?"

"No. I ... I feel that I would have betrayed it by remaining at work."

"You would have."

"If I had agreed to serve the looters, it's . . . it's Nat Taggart that Iwould have delivered to them. I couldn't. I couldn't let his achievement, andmine, end up with the looters as our final goal."

"No, you couldn't. Do you call this indifference? Do you think that youlove the railroad less than you did a month ago?"

"I think that I would give my life for just one more year on the railroad. . . But I can't go back to it."

"Then you know what they felt, all the men who quit, and what it was thatthey loved when they gave up."

"Francisco, " she asked, not looking at him, her head bent, "why did youask me whether I could have given it up twelve years ago?"

"Don't you know what night I am thinking of, just as you are?"

"Yes . . ." she whispered.

"That was the night I gave up d'Anconia Copper."

Slowly, with a long effort, she moved her head to glance up at him.

His face had the expression she had seen then, on that next morning,twelve years ago: the look of a smile, though he was not smiling, the quietlook of victory over pain, the look of a man's pride in the price he paid andin that which made it worth paying.

"But you didn't give it up," she said. "You didn't quit. You're still thePresident of d'Anconia Copper, only it means nothing to you now."

"It means as much to me now as it did that night."

"Then how can you let it go to pieces?"

"Dagny, you're more fortunate than I. Taggart Transcontinental is adelicate piece of precision machinery. It will not last long without you. Itcannot be run by slave labor. They will mercifully destroy it for you and youwon't have to see it serving the looters. But copper mining is a simpler job.D'Anconia Copper could have lasted for generations of looters and slaves.Crudely, miserably, ineptly—but it could have lasted and helped them to last.I had to destroy it myself."

-You-what?"

"I am destroying d'Anconia Copper, consciously, deliberately, by plan andby my own hand. I have to plan it as carefully and work as hard as if I wereproducing a fortune—in order not to let them notice it and stop me, in ordernot to let them seize the mines until it is too late. AH the effort andenergy I had hoped to spend on d'Anconia Copper, I'm spending them, only . .. only it's not to make it grow. I shall destroy every last bit of it andevery last penny of my fortune and every ounce of copper that could feed thelooters. I shall not leave it as I found it—I shall leave it as Sebastiand'Anconia found it—then let them try to exist without him or me!"

"Francisco!" she screamed. "How could you make yourself do it?"

"By the grace of the same love as yours," he answered quietly, "my lovefor d'Anconia Copper, for the spirit of which it was the shape.

Was—and, some day, will be again."

She sat still, trying to grasp all the implications of what she nowgrasped only as the numbness of shock. In the silence, the music of the radiosymphony went on, and the rhythm of the chords reached her like the slow,solemn pounding of steps, while she struggled to see at once the wholeprogression of twelve years: the tortured boy who called for help on herbreasts—the man who sat on the floor of a drawing room, playing marbles andlaughing at the destruction of great industries—the man who cried, "My love,I can't!" while refusing to help her—the man who drank a toast, in the dimbooth of a barroom, to the years which Sebastian d'Anconia had had to wait. .

"Francisco ... of all the guesses I tried to make about you ... Inever thought of it . . .1 never thought that you were one of those men whohad quit . . ."

"I was one of the first of them."

"I thought that they always vanished . . ."

"Well, hadn't I? Wasn't it the worst of what I did to you—that I left youlooking at a cheap playboy who was not the Francisco d'Anconia you hadknown?"

"Yes . . ." she whispered, "only the worst was that I couldn't believe it. . . I never did ... It was Francisco d'Anconia that I kept seeing everytime I saw you. . . ."

"I know. And I know what it did to you. I tried to help you understand,but it was too soon to tell you. Dagny, if I had told you—

that night or the day when you came to damn me for the San SebastianMines—that I was not an aimless loafer, that I was out to speed up thedestruction of everything we had held sacred together, the destruction ofd'Anconia Copper, of Taggart Transcontinental, of Wyatt Oil, of ReardenSteel—would you have found it easier to take?"

"Harder," she whispered. "I'm not sure T can take it, even now.

Neither your kind of renunciation nor my own . . . But, Francisco"—

she threw her head back suddenly to look up at him—"if this was yoursecret, then of all the hell you had to take, I was—"

"Oh yes, my darling, yes, you were the worst of it!" It was a desperatecry, its sound of laughter and of release confessing all the agony he wantedto sweep away. He seized her hand, he pressed his mouth to it, then his face,not to let her see the reflection of what his years had been like. "If it'sany kind of atonement, which it isn't . . .

whatever I made you suffer, that's how I paid for it . . . by knowing whatI was doing to you and having to do it . . . and waiting, waiting to . . .But it's over."

He raised his head, smiling, he looked down at her and she saw a look ofprotective tenderness come into his face, which told her of the despair hesaw in hers.

"Dagny, don't think of that. I won't claim any suffering of mine as myexcuse. Whatever my reason, I knew what I was doing and I've hurt youterribly. I'll need years to make up for it. Forget what"—she knew that hemeant: what his embrace had confessed—"what I haven't said. Of all the thingsI have to tell you, that is the one I'll say last." But his eyes, his smile,the grasp of his fingers on her wrist were saying it against his will."You've borne too much, and there's a great deal that you have to learn tounderstand in order to lose every scar of the torture you never should havehad to bear. All that matters now is that you're free to recover. We're free,both of us, we're free of the looters, we're out of their reach."

She said, her voice quietly desolate, "That's what I came here for—to try to understand. But I can't. It seems monstrously wrong to surrenderthe world to the looters, and monstrously wrong to live under their rule. Ican neither give up nor go back. I can neither exist without work nor work as

a serf. I had always thought that any sort of battle was proper, anything,except renunciation. I'm not sure we're right to quit, you and f, when weshould have fought them. But there is no way to fight. It's surrender, if weleave—and surrender, if we remain. I don't know what is right any longer.""Check your premises, Dagny. Contradictions don't exist."

"But I can't find any answer. I can't condemn you for what you're doing,yet it's horror that I feel—admiration and horror, at the same time. You, theheir of the d'Anconias, who could have surpassed all his ancestors of themiraculous hand that produced, you're turning your matchless ability to thejob of destruction. And I—I'm playing with cobblestones and shingling a roof,while a transcontinental railroad system is collapsing in the hands ofcongenital ward heelers. Yet you and I were the kind who determine the fateof the world. If this is what we let it come to, then it must have been ourown guilt. But I can't see the nature of our error."

"Yes, Dagny, it was our own guilt."

"Because we didn't work hard enough?"

"Because we worked too hard—and charged too little."

"What do you mean?"

"We never demanded the one payment that the world owed us—and we let ourbest reward go to the worst of men. The error was made centuries ago, it wasmade by Sebastian d'Anconia, by Nat Taggart, by every man who fed the worldand received no thanks in return.

You don't know what is right any longer? Dagny, this is not a battle overmaterial goods. It's a moral crisis, the greatest the world has ever facedand the last. Our age is the climax of centuries of evil. We must put an endto it, once and for all, or perish—we, the men of the mind. It was our ownguilt. We produced the wealth of the world—

but we let our enemies write its moral code."

"But we never accepted their code. We lived by our own standards."

"Yes—and paid ransoms for it! Ransoms in matter and in spirit—in money,which our enemies received, but did not deserve, and in honor, which wedeserved, but did not receive. That was our guilt—

that we were willing to pay. We kept mankind alive, yet we allowed men todespise us and to worship our destroyers. We allowed them to worshipincompetence and brutality, the recipients and the dispensers of theunearned. By accepting punishment, not for any sins, but for our virtues, webetrayed our code and made theirs possible. Dagny, theirs is the morality ofkidnappers. They use your love of virtue as a hostage. They know that you'llbear anything in order to work and produce, because you know that achievementis man's highest moral purpose, that he can't exist without it, and your loveof virtue is your love of life. They count on you to assume any burden. Theycount on you to feel that no effort is too great in the service of your love.

Dagny, your enemies are destroying you by means of your own power. Yourgenerosity and your endurance are their only tools. Your unrequited rectitudeis the only hold they have upon you. They know it.

You don't. The day when you'll discover it is the only thing they dread.

You must learn to understand them. You won't be free of them, until youdo. But when you do, you'll reach such a stage of rightful anger that you'llblast every rail of Taggart Transcontinental, rather than let it serve them!"

"But to leave it to them!" she moaned. "To abandon it ... To abandonTaggart Transcontinental . . . when it's . . . it's almost like a livingperson . . ."

"It was. It isn't any longer. Leave it to them. It won't do them any good.Let it go. We don't need it. We can rebuild it. They can't. We'll survivewithout it. They won't."

"But we, brought down to renouncing and giving up!"

"Dagny, we who've been called 'materialists' by the killers of the humanspirit, we're the only ones who know how little value or meaning there is inmaterial objects as such, because we're the ones who create their value andmeaning. We can afford to give them up, for a short while, in order to redeemsomething much more precious. We are the soul, of which railroads, coppermines, steel mills and oil wells are the body—and they are living entitiesthat beat day and night, like our hearts, in the sacred function ofsupporting human life, but only so long as they remain our body, only so longas they remain the expression, the reward and the property of achievement.Without us, they are corpses and their sole product is poison, not wealth orfood, the poison of disintegration that turns men into hordes of scavengers.

Dagny, learn to understand the nature of your own power and you'llunderstand the paradox you now see around you. You do not have to depend onany material possessions, they depend on you, you create them, you own theone and only tool of production. Wherever you are, you will always be able toproduce. But the looters—by their own stated theory—are in desperate,permanent, congenital need and at the blind mercy of matter. Why don't youtake them at their word? They need railroads, factories, mines, motors, whichthey cannot make or run. Of what use will your railroad be to them withoutyou? Who held it together? Who kept it alive? Who saved it, time and timeagain?

Was it your brother James? Who fed him? Who fed the looters? Who producedtheir weapons? Who gave them the means to enslave you?

The impossible spectacle of shabby little incompetents holding controlover the products of genius—who made it possible? Who supported your enemies,who forged your chains, who destroyed your achievement?"

The motion that threw her upright was like a silent cry. He shot to hisfeet with the stored abruptness of a spring uncoiling, his voice driving onin merciless triumph: "You're beginning to see, aren't you? Dagny! Leave themthe carcass of that railroad, leave them all the rusted rails and rotted tiesand gutted engines—but don't leave them your mind! Don't leave them yourmind! The fate of the world rests on that decision!"

"Ladies and gentlemen, " said the panic-pregnant voice of a radioannouncer, breaking off the chords of the symphony, "we interrupt thisbroadcast to bring you a special news bulletin. The greatest disaster inrailroad history occurred in the early hours of the morning on the main lineof Taggart Transcontinental, at Winston, Colorado, demolishing the famousTaggart Tunnel!"

Her scream sounded like the screams that had rung out in the one lastmoment in the darkness of the tunnel. Its sound remained with him through therest of the broadcast—as they both ran to the radio in the cabin and stood,in equal terror, her eyes staring at the radio, his eyes watching her face.

"The details of the story were obtained from Luke Beal, fireman of theTaggart luxury main liner, the Comet, who was found unconscious at thewestern portal of the tunnel this morning, and who appears to be the solesurvivor of the catastrophe. Through some astounding infraction of safetyrules—in circumstances not yet fully established—the Comet, westbound for SanFrancisco, was sent into the tunnel with a coal-burning steam locomotive. TheTaggart Tunnel, an eight-mile bore, cut through the summit of the RockyMountains and regarded as an engineering achievement not to be equaled in ourtime, was built by the grandson of Nathaniel Taggart, in the great age of theclean, smokeless Diesel-electric engine. The tunnel's ventilation system wasnot designed to provide for the heavy smoke and fumes of coal-burninglocomotives—and it was known to every railroad employee in the district thatto send a train into the tunnel with such a locomotive would mean death bysuffocation for everyone aboard. The Comet, none the less, was so ordered toproceed. According to Fireman Beal, the effects of the fumes began to be felt

when the train was about three miles inside the tunnel. Engineer Joseph Scottthrew the throttle wide open, in a desperate attempt to gain speed, but theold, worn engine was inadequate for the weight of the long train and therising grade of the track. Struggling through the thickening fumes, engineerand fireman had barely managed to force the leaking steam boilers up to aspeed of forty miles per hour—when some passenger, prompted undoubtedly bythe panic of choking, pulled the emergency brake cord. The sudden jolt of thestop apparently broke the engine's airhose, for the train could not bestarted again. There were screams coming from the cars. Passengers werebreaking windows. Engineer Scott struggled frantically to make the enginestart, but collapsed at the throttle, overcome by the fumes.

Fireman Beal leaped from the engine and ran. He was within sight of thewestern portal, when he heard the blast of the explosion, which is the lastthing he remembers. The rest of the story was gathered from railroademployees at Winston Station. It appears that an Army Freight Special,westbound, carrying a heavy load of explosives, had been given no warningabout the presence of the Comet on the track just ahead. Both trains hadencountered delays and were running off their schedules. It appears that theFreight Special had been ordered to proceed regardless of signals, becausethe tunnel's signal system was out of order. It is said that in spite ofspeed regulations and in view of the frequent breakdowns of the ventilatingsystem, it was the tacit custom of all engineers to go full speed while inthe tunnel. It appears, as far as can be established at present, that theComet was stalled just beyond the point where the tunnel makes a sharp curve.It is believed that everyone aboard was dead by that time. It is doubted thatthe engineer of the Freight Special, turning a curve at eighty miles an hour,would have been able to see, in time, the observation window of the Comet'slast car, which was brightly lighted when it left Winston Station. What isknown is that the Freight Special crashed into the rear of the Comet. Theexplosion of the Special's cargo broke windows in a farmhouse five miles awayand brought down such a weight of rock upon the tunnel that rescue partieshave not yet been able to come within three miles of where either train hadbeen. It is not expected that any survivors will be found—and it is notbelieved that the Taggart Tunnel can ever be rebuilt."

She stood still. She looked as if she were seeing, not the room aroundher, but the scene in Colorado. Her sudden movement had the abruptness of aconvulsion. With the single-tracked rationality of a somnambulist,, shewhirled to find her handbag, as if it were the only object in existence, sheseized it, she whirled to the door and ran.

"Dagny!" he screamed. "Don't go back!"

The scream had no more power to reach her than if he were calling to heracross the miles between him and the mountains of Colorado.

He ran after her, he caught her, seizing her by both elbows, and he cried,"Don't go back! Dagny! In the name of anything sacred to you, don't go back!"

She looked as if she did not know who he was. In a contest of physicalstrength, he could have broken the bones of her arms without effort.

But with the force of a living creature fighting for life, she toreherself loose so violently that she threw him off balance for a moment. Whenhe regained his footing, she was running down the hill—running as he had runat the sound of the alarm siren in Rearden's mills—running to her car on theroad below.

His letter of resignation lay on the desk before him—and James Taggart satstaring at it, hunched by hatred. He felt as if his enemy were this piece ofpaper, not the words on it, but the sheet and the ink that had given thewords a material finality. He had always regarded thoughts and words asinconclusive, but a material shape was that which he had spent his lifeescaping: a commitment.

He had not decided to resign—not really, he thought; he had dictated theletter for a motive which he identified to himself only as "just in case."The letter, he felt, was a form of protection; but he had not signed it yet,and that was his protection against the protection. The hatred was directedat whatever had brought him to feel that he would not be able to continueextending this process much longer.

He had received word of the catastrophe at eight o'clock this morning; bynoon, he had arrived at his office. An instinct that came from reasons whichhe knew, but spent his whole effort on not knowing, had told him that he hadto be there, this time.

The men who had been his marked cards—in a game he knew how to play—weregone. Clifton Locey was barricaded behind the statement of a doctor who hadannounced that Mr. Locey was suffering from a heart condition which made itimpossible to disturb him at present. One of Taggart's executive assistantswas said to have left for Boston last night, and the other was said to havebeen called unexpectedly to an unnamed hospital, to the bedside of a fathernobody had ever suspected him of having. There was no answer at the home ofthe chief engineer. The vice-president in charge of public relations couldnot be found.

Driving through the streets to his office, Taggart had seen the blackletters of the headlines. Walking down the corridors of TaggartTranscontinental, he had heard the voice of a speaker pouring from a radio insomeone's office, the kind of voice one expects to hear on unlighted streetcorners: it was screaming demands for the nationalization of the railroads.

He had walked through the corridors, his steps noisy, in order to be seen,and hasty, in order not to be stopped for questions. He had locked the doorof his office, ordering his secretary not to admit any person or phone calland to tell all comers that Mr. Taggart was busy.

Then he sat at his desk, alone with blank terror. He felt as if he weretrapped in a subterranean vault and the lock could never be broken again—andas if he were held on display in the sight of the whole city below, hopingthat the lock would hold out for eternity. He had to be here, in this office,it was required of him, he had to sit idly and wait—wait for the unknown todescend upon him and to determine his actions—and the terror was both of whowould come for him and of the fact that nobody came, nobody to tell him whatto do.

The ringing of the telephones in the outer office sounded like screams forhelp. He looked at the door with a sensation of malevolent triumph at thethought of all those voices being defeated by the innocuous figure of hissecretary, a young man expert at nothing but the art of evasion, which hepracticed with the gray, rubber limpness of the amoral. The voices, thoughtTaggart, were coming from Colorado, from every center of the Taggart system,from every office of the building around him. He was safe so long as he didnot have to hear them.

His emotions had clogged into a still, solid, opaque ball within him,which the thought of the men who operated the Taggart system could notpierce; those men were merely enemies to be outwitted. The sharper bites offear came from the thought of the men on the Board of Directors; but hisletter of resignation was his fire escape, which would leave them stuck withthe fire. The sharpest fear came from the thought of the men in Washington.If they called, he would have to answer; his rubber secretary would knowwhose voices superseded his orders. But Washington did not call.

The fear went through him in spasms, once in a while, leaving his mouthdry. He did not know what he dreaded. He knew that it was not the threat ofthe radio speaker. What he had experienced at the sound of the snarling voicehad been more like a terror which he felt because he was expected to feel it,a duty-terror, something that went with his position, like well-tailored

suits and luncheon speeches. But under it, he had felt a sneaking littlehope, swift and furtive like the course of a cockroach: if that threat tookform, it would solve everything, save him from decision, save him fromsigning the letter ... he would not be President of TaggartTranscontinental any longer, but neither would anyone else . . . neitherwould anyone else. . . .

He sat, looking down at his desk, keeping his eyes and his mind out offocus. It was as if he were immersed in a pool of fog, struggling not to letit reach the finality of any form. That which exists possesses identity; hecould keep it out of existence by refusing to identify it.

He did not examine the events in Colorado, he did not attempt to grasptheir cause, he did not consider their consequences. He did not think. Theclogged ball of emotion was like a physical weight in his chest, filling hisconsciousness, releasing him from the responsibility of thought. The bahl washatred—hatred as his only answer, hatred as the sole reality, hatred withoutobject, cause, beginning or end, hatred as his claim against the universe, asa justification, as a right, as an absolute.

The screaming of the telephones went on through the silence. He knew thatthose pleas for help were not addressed to him, but to an entity whose shapehe had stolen. It was this shape that the screams were now tearing away fromhim; he felt as if the ringing ceased to be sounds and became a succession ofslashes hitting his skull. The object of the hatred began to take form, as ifsummoned by the bells. The solid ball exploded within him and flung himblindly into action.

Rushing out of the room, in defiance of all the faces around him, he wentrunning down the halls to the Operating Department and into the anteroom ofthe Operating Vice-President's office.

The door to the office was open: he saw the sky in the great windowsbeyond an empty desk. Then he saw the staff in the anteroom around him, andthe blond head of Eddie Willers in the glass cubbyhole. He walkedpurposefully straight toward Eddie Willers, he flung the glass door open and,from the threshold, in the sight and hearing of the room, he screamed: "Whereis she?"

Eddie Willers rose slowly to his feet and stood looking at Taggart with anodd kind of dutiful curiosity, as if this were one more phenomenon to observeamong all the unprecedented things he had observed. He did not answer.

"Where is she?"

"I cannot tell you."

"Listen, you stubborn little punk, this is no time for ceremony! If you'retrying to make me believe that you don't know where she is, I don't believeyou! You know it and you're going to tell me, or I'll report you to theUnification Board! I'll swear to them that you know it—then try and provethat you don't! "

There was a faint tone of astonishment in Eddie's voice as he answered,"I've never attempted to imply that I don't know where she is, Jim, I knowit. But I won't tell you."

Taggart's scream rose to the shrill, impotent sound that confesses amiscalculation: "Do you realize what you're saying?"

"Why, yes, of course."

"Will you repeat it"—he waved at the room—"for these witnesses?"

Eddie raised his voice a little, more in precision and clarity than involume: "I know where she is. But I will not tell you."

"You're confessing that you're an accomplice who's aiding and abetting adeserter?"

"If that's what you wish to call it."

"But it's a crime! It's a crime against the nation. Don't you know that?""No. "

"It's against the law!""Yes."

"This is a national emergency! You have no right to any private secrets!You're withholding vital information! I'm the President of this railroad! I'mordering you to tell me! You can't refuse to obey an order!

It's a penitentiary offense! Do you understand?"

"Yes."

"Do you refuse?""I do."

Years of training had made Taggart able to watch any audience around him,without appearing to do so. He saw the tight, closed faces of the staff,faces that were not his allies. All had a look of despair, except the face ofEddie Willers. The "feudal serf" of Taggart Transcontinental was the only onewho seemed untouched by the disaster. He looked at Taggart with thelifelessly conscientious glance of a scholar confronted by a field ofknowledge he had never wanted to study.

"Do you realize that you're a traitor?" yelled Taggart.

Eddie asked quietly, 'To whom?"

"To the people! It's treason to shield a deserter! It's economic treason!Your duty to feed the people comes first, above anything else whatever! Everypublic authority has said so! Don't you know it?

Don't you know what they'll do to you?"

"Don't you see that I don't give a damn about that?"

"Oh, you don't? I'll quote that to the Unification Board! I have all thesewitnesses to prove that you said—"

"Don't bother about witnesses, Jim. Don't put them on the spot. I'll writedown everything I said, I'll sign it, and you can take it to the Board."

The sudden explosion of Taggart's voice sounded as if he had been slapped:"Who are you to stand against the government? Who are you, you miserablelittle office rat, to judge national policies and hold opinions of your own?Do you think the country has time to bother about your opinions, your wishesor your precious little conscience?

You're going to learn a lesson—all of you!—all of you spoiled, self-indulgent, undisciplined little two-bit clerks, who strut as if that crapabout your rights was serious! You're going to learn that these are not thedays of Nat Taggart!"

Eddie said nothing. For an instant, they stood looking at each otheracross the desk. Taggart's face was distorted by terror, Eddie's remainedsternly serene. James Taggart believed the existence of an Eddie Willers toowell; Eddie Willers could not believe the existence of a James Taggart.

"Do you think the nation will bother about your wishes or hers?"

screamed Taggart. "It's her duty to come back! It's her duty to work!

What do we care whether she wants to work or not? We need her!"

"Do you, Jim?"

An impulse pertaining to self-preservation made Taggart back a step awayfrom the sound of that particular tone, a very quiet tone, in the voice ofEddie Willers. But Eddie made no move to follow. He remained standing behindhis desk, in a manner suggesting the civilized tradition of a businessoffice.

"You won't find her," he said, "She won't be back. I'm glad she won't. Youcan starve, you can close the railroad, you can throw me in jail, you canhave me shot—what does it matter? I won't tell you where she is. If I see thewhole country crashing, I won't tell you. You won't find her. You—"

They whirled at the sound of the entrance door flung open. They saw Dagnystanding on the threshold.

She wore a wrinkled cotton dress, and her hair was disheveled by hours ofdriving. She stopped for the duration of a glance around her, as if to

recapture the place, but there was no recognition of persons in her eyes, theglance merely swept through the room, as if making a swift inventory ofphysical objects. Her face was not the face they remembered; it had aged, notby means of lines, but by means of a still, naked look stripped of anyquality save ruthlessness.

Yet their first response, ahead of shock or wonder, was a single emotionthat went through the room like a gasp of relief. It was in all their facesbut one: Eddie Willers, who alone had been calm a moment ago, collapsed withhis face down on his desk; he made no sound, but the movements of hisshoulders were sobs.

Her face gave no sign of acknowledgment to anyone, no greeting, as if herpresence here were inevitable and no words were necessary. She went straightto the door of her office; passing the desk of her secretary, she said, hervoice like the sound of a business machine, neither rude nor gentle, "AskEddie to come in."

James Taggart was the first one to move, as if dreading to let her out ofhis sight. He rushed in after her, he cried, "I couldn't help it!" and then,life returning to him, his own, his normal kind of life, he screamed, "It wasyour fault! You did it! You're to blame for it! Because you left!"

He wondered whether his scream had been an illusion inside his own ears.Her face remained blank; yet she had turned to him; she looked as if soundshad reached her, but not words, not the communication of a mind. What he feltfor a moment was his closest approach to a sense of his own non-existence.

Then he saw the faintest change in her face, merely the indication ofperceiving a human presence, but she was looking past him and he turned andsaw that Eddie Willers had entered the office.

There were traces of tears in Eddie's eyes, but he made no attempt to hidethem, he stood straight, as if the tears or any embarrassment or any apologyfor them were as irrelevant to him as to her.

She said, "Get Ryan on the telephone, tell him I'm here, then let me speakto him." Ryan had been the general manager of the railroad's Central Region.

Eddie gave her a warning by not answering at once, then said, his voice aseven as hers, "Ryan's gone, Dagny. He quit last week."

They did not notice Taggart, as they did not notice the furniture aroundthem. She had not granted him even the recognition of ordering him out of heroffice. Like a paralytic, uncertain of his muscles'

obedience, he gathered his strength and slipped out. But he was certain ofthe first thing he had to do: he hurried to his office to destroy his letterof resignation.

She did not notice his exit; she was looking at Eddie. "Is Knowland here?"she asked.

"No. He's gone.""Andrews?""Gone.""McGuire?""Gone."

He went on quietly to recite the list of those he knew she would ask for,those most needed in this hour, who had resigned and vanished within the pastmonth. She listened without astonishment or emotion, as one listens to thecasualty list of a battle where all are doomed and it makes no differencewhose names fall first.

When he finished, she made no comment, but asked, "What has been donesince this morning?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing?"

"Dagny, any office boy could have issued orders here since this morningand everybody would have obeyed him, But even the office boys know that

whoever makes the first move today will be held responsible for the future,the present and the past—when the buck passing begins. He would not save thesystem, he would merely lose his job by the time he saved one division.Nothing has been done. It's stopped still. Whatever is moving, is moving onanyone's blind guess-out on the line where they don't know whether they're to move or to stop.Some trains are held at stations, others are going on, waiting to be stoppedbefore they reach Colorado. It's whatever the local dispatchers decide. TheTerminal manager downstairs has cancelled all transcontinental traffic fortoday, including tonight's Comet. I don't know what the manager in SanFrancisco is doing. Only the wrecking crews are working. At the tunnel. Theyhaven't come anywhere near the wreck as yet. I don't think they will."

"Phone the Terminal manager downstairs and tell him to put alltranscontinental trains back on the schedule at once, including tonight'sComet. Then come back here."

When he came back, she was bending over the maps she had spread on atable, and she spoke while he made rapid notes: "Route all westbound trainssouth from Kirby, Nebraska, down the spur track to Hastings, down the trackof the Kansas Western to Laurel, Kansas, then to the track of the AtlanticSouthern at Jasper, Oklahoma.

West on the Atlantic Southern to Flagstaff, Arizona, north on the track ofthe Flagstaff-Homedale to Elgin, Utah, north to Midland, northwest on thetrack of the Wasatch Railway to Salt Lake City. The Wasatch Railway is anabandoned narrow-gauge. Buy it. Have the gauge spread to standard. If theowners are afraid, since sales are illegal, pay them twice the money andproceed with the work. There is no rail between Laurel, Kansas, and Jasper,Oklahoma—three miles, no rail between Elgin and Midland, Utah—five and a halfmiles. Have the rail laid.

Have construction crews start at once—recruit every local man available,pay twice the legal wages, three times, anything they ask—put three shiftson—and have the job done overnight. For rail, tear up the sidings at Winston,Colorado, at Silver Springs, Colorado, at Leeds, Utah, at Benson, Nevada. Ifany local stooges of the Unification Board come to stop the work—giveauthority to our local men, the ones you trust, to bribe them. Don't put thatthrough the Accounting Department, charge it to me, I'll pay it. If they findsome case where it doesn't work, have them tell the stooge that Directive 10-289 does not provide for local injunctions, that an injunction has to bebrought against our headquarters and that they have to sue me, if they wishto stop us."

"Is that true?"

"How do I know? How can anybody know? But by the time they untangle it anddecide whatever it is they please to decide—our track will be built.""I see."

"I'll go over the lists and give you the names of our local men to put incharge—if they're still there. By the time tonight's Comet Teaches Kirby,Nebraska, the track will be ready. It will add about thirty-six hours to thetranscontinental schedule—but there will be a transcontinental schedule. Thenhave them get for me out of the files the old maps of our road as it wasbefore Nat Taggart's grandson built the tunnel."

"The . . . what?" He did not raise his voice, but the catch of his breathwas the break of emotion he had wanted to avoid.

Her face did not change, but a fault note in her voice acknowledged him, anote of gentleness, not reproof: "The old maps of the days before the tunnel.We're going back, Eddie. Let's hope we can. No, we won't rebuild the tunnel.There's no way to do it now. But the old grade that crossed the Rockies isstill there. It can be reclaimed. Only it will be hard to get the rail for itand the men to do it. Particularly the men."

He knew, as he had known from the first, that she had seen his tears andthat she had not walked past in indifference, even though her clear, tonelessvoice and unmoving face gave him no sign of feeling.

There was some quality in her manner, which he sensed but could nottranslate. Yet the feeling it gave him, translated, was as if she were sayingto him: I know, I understand, I would feel compassion and gratitude, if wewere alive and free to feel, but we're not, are we, Eddie?—we're on a deadplanet, like the moon, where we must move, but dare not stop for a breath offeeling or we'll discover that there is no air to breathe.

"We have today and tomorrow to get things started," she said. "I'll leavefor Colorado tomorrow night."

"If you want to fly, I'll have to rent a plane for you somewhere.

Yours is still in the shops, they can't get the parts for it."

"No, I'll go by rail. I have to see the line. I'll take tomorrow's Comet."

It was two hours later, in a brief pause between long-distance phonecalls, that she asked him suddenly the first question which did not pertainto the railroad: "What have they done to Hank Rearden?"

Eddie caught himself in the small evasion of looking away, forced hisglance back to meet hers, and answered, "He gave in. He signed their GiftCertificate, at the last moment."

"Oh." The sound conveyed no shock or censure, it was merely a vocalpunctuation mark, denoting the acceptance of a fact. "Have you heard fromQuentin Daniels?"

"No. "

"He sent no letter or message for me?""No. "

He guessed the thing she feared and it reminded him of a matter he had notreported. "Dagny, there's another problem that's been growing all over thesystem since you left. Since May first. It's the frozen trains,"

"The what?"

"We've had trains abandoned on the line, on some passing track, in themiddle of nowhere, usually at night—with the entire crew gone.

They just leave the train and vanish. There's never any warning given orany special reason, it's more like an epidemic, it hits the men suddenly andthey go. It's been happening on other railroads, too. Nobody can explain it.But I think that everybody understands. It's the directive that's doing it.It's our men's form of protest. They try to go on and then they suddenlyreach a moment when they can't take it any longer.

What can we do about it?" He shrugged. "Oh well, who is John Gait?"

She nodded thoughtfully; she did not look astonished.

The telephone rang and the voice of her secretary said, "Mr. Wesley Mouchcalling from Washington, Miss Taggart."

Her lips stiffened a little, as at the unexpected touch of an insect. "Itmust be for my brother," she said.

"No, Miss Taggart. For you."

"All right. Put him on."

"Miss Taggart, " said the voice of Wesley Mouch in the tone of a cocktail-party host, "I was so glad to hear you've regained your health that I wantedto welcome you back in person. I know that your health required a long restand I appreciate the patriotism that made you cut your leave of absence shortin this terrible emergency. I wanted to assure you that you can count on ourco-operation in any step you now find it necessary to take. Our fullest co-operation, assistance and support. If there are any . . . special exceptionsyou might require, please feel certain that they can be granted."

She let him speak, even though he had made several small pauses invitingan answer. When his pause became long enough, she said, "I would be muchobliged if you would let me speak to Mr. Weatherby."

"Why, of course, Miss Taggart, any time you wish . . . why . . .that is ... do you mean, now?""Yes. Right now."

He understood. But he said, "Yes, Miss Taggart."

When Mr. Weatherby's voice came on the wire, it sounded cautious: "Yes,Miss Taggart? Of what service can I be to you?"

"You can tell your boss that if he doesn't want me to quit again, as heknows I did, he is never to call me or speak to me. Anything your gang has totell me, let them send you to tell it. I'll speak to you, but not to him. Youmay tell him that my reason is what he did to Hank Rearden when he was onRearden's payroll. If everybody else has forgotten it, I haven't."

"It is my duty to assist the nation's railroads at any time, MissTaggart." Mr. Weatherby sounded as if he were trying to avoid the commitmentof having heard what he had heard; but a sudden note of interest crept intohis voice as he asked slowly, thoughtfully, with guarded shrewdness, "Am I tounderstand, Miss Taggart, that it is your wish to deal exclusively with me inall official matters? May I take this as your policy?"

She gave a brief, harsh chuckle. "Go ahead," she said. "You may list me asyour exclusive property, use me as a special item of pull, and trade me allover Washington. But I don't know what good that will do you, because I'm notgoing to play the game, I'm not going to trade favors, I'm simply going tostart breaking your laws right now—and you can arrest me when you feel thatyou can afford to."

"I believe that you have an old-fashioned idea about law, Miss Taggart.Why speak of rigid, unbreakable laws? Our modern laws are elastic and open tointerpretation according to . . . circumstances."

"Then start being elastic right now, because I'm not and neither arerailroad catastrophes."

She hung up, and said to Eddie, in the tone of an estimate passed onphysical objects, "They'll leave us alone for a while."

She did not seem to notice the changes in her office: the absence of NatTaggart's portrait, the new glass coffee table where Mr. Locey had spread,for the benefit of visitors, a display of the loudest humanitarian magazineswith titles of articles headlined on their covers.

She heard—with the attentive look of a machine equipped to record, not toreact—Eddie's account of what one month had done to the railroad. She heardhis report on what he guessed about the causes of the catastrophe. She faced,with the same look of detachment, a succession of men who went in and out ofher office with over hurried steps and hands fumbling in superfluousgestures. He thought that she had become impervious to anything. Butsuddenly—while pacing the office, dictating to him a list of track-layingmaterials and where to obtain them illegally—she stopped and looked down atthe magazines on the coffee table. Their headlines said: "The New SocialConscience," "Our Duty to the Underprivileged," "Need versus Greed." With asingle movement of her arm, the abrupt, explosive movement of sheer physicalbrutality, such as he had never seen from her before, she swept the magazinesoff the table and went on, her voice reciting a list of figures without abreak, as if there were no connection between her mind and the violence ofher body.

Late in the afternoon, finding a moment alone in her office, shetelephoned Hank Rearden.

She gave her name to his secretary—and she heard, in the way he said it,the haste with which he had seized the receiver: "Dagny?"

"Hello, Hank. I'm back."

"Where?"

"In my office."

She heard the things he did not say, in the moment's silence on the wire,then he said, "1 suppose I'd better start bribing people at once to get theore to start pouring rail for you."

"Yes. As much of it as you can. It doesn't have to be Rearden Metal. Itcan be—" The break in her voice was almost too brief to notice, but what itheld was the thought: Rearden Metal rail for going back to the time beforeheavy steel?—perhaps back to the time of wooden rails with strips of iron?"It can be steel, any weight, anything you can give me."

"All right. Dagny, do you know that I've surrendered Rearden Metal tothem? I've signed the Gift Certificate."

"Yes, I know."

"I've given in."

"Who am I to blame you? Haven't I?" He did not answer, and she said,"Hank, I don't think they care whether there's a train or a blast furnaceleft on earth. We do. They're holding us by our love of it, and we'll go onpaying so long as there's still one chance left to keep one single wheelalive and moving in token of human intelligence. We'll go on holding itafloat, like our drowning child, and when the flood swallows it, we'll godown with the last wheel and the last syllogism. I know what we're paying,but—price is no object any longer."

"I know."

"Don't be afraid for me, Hank, I'll be all right by tomorrow morning.""I'll never be afraid for you, darling. I'll see you tonight."

CHAPTER IXTHE FACE WITHOUT PAIN OR FEAR OR GUILT

The silence of her apartment and the motionless perfection of objects thathad remained just as she had left them a month before, struck her with asense of relief and desolation together, when she entered her living room.The silence gave her an illusion of privacy and ownership; the sight of theobjects reminded her that they were preserving a moment she could notrecapture, as she could not undo the events that had happened since.

There was still a remnant of daylight beyond the windows. She had left theoffice earlier than, she intended, unable to summon the effort for any taskthat could be postponed till morning. This was new to her —and it was newthat she should now feel more at home in her apartment than in her office.

She took a shower, and stood for long, blank minutes, letting the waterrun over her body, but stepped out hastily when she realized that what shewanted to wash off was not the dust of the drive from the country, but thefeel of the office.

She dressed, lighted a cigarette and walked into the living room, to standat the window, looking at the city, as she had stood looking at thecountryside at the start of this day.

She had said she would give her life for one more year on the

railroad. She was back; but this was not the joy of working; it

was only the clear, cold peace of a decision reached—and the

stillness of unadmitted pain.

Clouds had wrapped the sky and had descended as fog to wrap the streetsbelow, as if the sky were engulfing the city. She could see the whole ofManhattan Island, a long, triangular shape cutting into an invisible ocean.It looked like the prow of a sinking ship; a few tall buildings still roseabove it, like funnels, but the rest was disappearing under gray-blue coils,going down slowly into vapor and space.

This was how they had gone—she thought—Atlantis, the city that sank intothe ocean, and all the other kingdoms that vanished, leaving the same legendin all the languages of men, and the same longing.

She felt—as she had felt it one spring night, slumped across her desk inthe crumbling office of the John Gait Line, by a window facing a dark alley—the sense and vision of her own world, which she would never reach. , , .You—she thought—whoever you are, whom ,1

have always loved and never found, you whom I expected to see at the endof the rails beyond the horizon, you whose presence I had always felt in thestreets of the city and whose world I had wanted to build, it is my love foryou that had kept me moving, my love and my hope to reach you and my wish tobe worthy of you on the day when I would stand before you face to face. Now Iknow that I shall never find you—

that it is not to be reached or lived—but what is left of my life is stillyours, and I will go on in your name, even though it is a name I'll neverlearn, I will go on serving you, even though I'm never to win, I will go on,to be worthy of you on the day when I would have met you, even though Iwon't. . . . She had never accepted hopelessness, but she stood at the windowand, addressed to the shape of a fogbound city, it was her self-dedication tounrequited love.

The doorbell rang.

She turned with indifferent astonishment to open, the door—but she knewthat she should have expected him, when she saw that it was Franciscod'Anconia. She felt no shock and no rebellion, only the cheerless serenity ofher assurance—and she raised her head to face him, with a slow, deliberate

movement, as if telling him that she had chosen her stand and that she stoodin the open.

His face was grave and calm; the look of happiness was gone, but theamusement of the playboy had not returned. He looked as if all masks weredown, he looked direct, tightly disciplined, intent upon a purpose, he lookedlike a man able to know the earnestness of action, as she had once expectedhim to look—he had never seemed so attractive as he did in this moment—andshe noted, in astonishment, her sudden feeling that he was not a man who haddeserted her, but a man whom she had deserted.

"Dagny, are you able to talk about it now?"

"Yes—if you wish. Come in."

He glanced briefly at her living room, her home which he had neverentered, then his eyes came back to her. He was watching her attentively. Heseemed to know that the quiet simplicity of her manner was the worst of allsigns for his purpose, that it was like a spread of ashes where no flicker ofpain could be revived, that even pain would have been a form of fire.

"Sit down, Francisco."

She remained standing before him, as if consciously letting him see thatshe had nothing to hide, not even the weariness of her posture, the price shehad paid for this day and her carelessness of price.

"I don't think I can stop you now," he said, "if you've made your choice.But if there's one chance left to stop you, it's a chance I have to take."

She shook her head slowly. "There isn't. And—what for, Francisco?

You've given up. What difference does it make to you whether I perish withthe railroad or away from it?"

"I haven't given up the future,"

"What future?"

"The day when the looters will perish, but we won't."

"If Taggart Transcontinental is to perish with the looters, then so am I."

He did not take his eyes off her face and he did not answer.

She added dispassionately, "I thought I could live without it. I can't.

I'll never try it again. Francisco, do you remember?—we both believed,when we started, that the only sin on earth was to do things badly, I stillbelieve it." The first note of life shuddered in her voice. "I can't stand byand watch what they did at that tunnel. I can't accept what they're allaccepting—Francisco, it's the thing we thought so monstrous, you and I!—thebelief that disasters are one's natural fate, to be borne, not fought. Ican't accept submission. I can't accept helplessness. I can't acceptrenunciation. So long as there's a railroad left to run, I'll run it."

"In order to maintain the looters' world?"

"In order to maintain the last strip of mine."

"Dagny," he said slowly, "I know why one loves one's work. I know what itmeans to you, the job of running trains. But you would not run them if theywere empty. Dagny, what is it you see when you think of a moving train?"

She glanced at the city. "The life of a man of ability who might haveperished in that catastrophe, but will escape the next one, which I'llprevent—a man who has an intransigent mind and an unlimited ambition, and isin love with his own life . . . the kind of man who is what we were when westarted, you and I. You gave him up. I can't."

He closed his eyes for an instant, and the tightening movement of hismouth was a smile, a smile substituting for a moan of understanding,amusement and pain. He asked, his voice gravely gentle, "Do you think thatyou can still serve him—that kind of man—by running the railroad?"

"Yes."

"All right, Dagny. I won't try to stop you. So long as you still thinkthat, nothing can stop you, or should. You will stop on the day when you'll

discover that your work has been placed in the service, not of that man'slife, but of his destruction."

"Francisco!" It was a cry of astonishment and despair. "You do understandit, you know what I mean by that kind of man, you see him, too!"

"Oh yes," he said simply, casually, looking at some point in space withinthe room, almost as if he were seeing a real person. He added, "Why shouldyou be astonished? You said that we were of his kind once, you and I. Westill are. But one of us has betrayed him."

"Yes," she said sternly, "one of us has. We cannot serve him byrenunciation."

"We cannot serve him by making terms with his destroyers.""I'm not making terms with them. They need me. They know it.It's my terms that I'll make them accept."

"By playing a game in which they gain benefits in exchange for harmingyou?"

"If I can keep Taggart Transcontinental in existence, it's the onlybenefit I want. What do I care if they make me pay ransoms? Let them havewhat they want. I'll have the railroad."

He smiled. "Do you think so? Do you think that their need of you is yourprotection? Do you think that you can give them what they want? No, you won'tquit until you see, of your own sight and judgment, what it is that theyreally want. You know, Dagny, we were taught that some things belong to Godand others to Caesar. Perhaps their God would permit it. But the man you saywe're serving—he docs not permit it. He permits no divided allegiance, no warbetween your mind and your body, no gulf between your values and youractions, no tributes to Caesar. He permits no Caesars."

"For twelve years," she said softly, "I would have thought itinconceivable that there might come a day when I would have to beg yourforgiveness on my knees. Now I think it's possible. If I come to see thatyou're right, I will. But not until then."

"You will. But not on your knees."

He was looking at her, as if he were seeing her body as she stood beforehim, even though his eyes were directed at her face, and his glance told herwhat form of atonement and surrender he was seeing in the future. She saw theeffort he made to look away, his hope that she had not seen his glance orunderstood it, his silent struggle, betrayed by the tension of a few musclesunder the skin of his face—the face she knew so well, "Until then, Dagny,remember that we're enemies. I didn't want to tell you this, but you're thefirst person who almost stepped into heaven and came back to earth. You'veglimpsed too much, so you have to know this clearly. It's you that I'mfighting, not your brother James or Wesley Mouch. It's you that I have todefeat. I am out to end all the things that are most precious to you rightnow. While you'll struggle to save Taggart Transcontinental, I will beworking to destroy it. Don't ever ask me for help or money. You know myreasons. Now you may hate me—as, from your stand, you should."

She raised her head a little, there was no perceptible change in herposture, it was no more than her awareness of her own body and of its meaningto him, but for the length of one sentence she stood as a woman, thesuggestion of defiance coming only from the faintly stressed spacing of herwords: "And what will it do to you?"

He looked at her, in full understanding, but neither admitting nor denyingthe confession she wanted to tear from him. "That is no one's concern butmine," he answered.

It was she who weakened, but realized, while saying it, that this wasstill more cruel: "I don't hate you. I've tried to, for years, but I neverwill, no matter what we do, either one of us."

"I know it," he said, his voice low, so that she did not hear the pain,but felt it within herself as if by direct reflection from him.

"Francisco!" she cried, in desperate defense of him against herself."How can you do what you're doing?"

"By the grace of my love"—for you, said his eyes—"for the man,"said his voice, "who did not perish in your catastrophe and who will neverperish,"

She stood silently still for a moment, as if in respectful acknowledgment."I wish I could spare you what you're going to go through," he said, thegentleness of his voice saying: It's not me that you should pity.

"But I can't. Every one of us has to travel that road by his own steps.But it's the same road.""Where does it lead?"

He smiled, as if softly closing a door on the questions that he would notanswer. "To Atlantis," he said."What?" she asked, startled.

"Don't you remember?—the lost city that only the spirits of heroes canenter."

The connection that struck her suddenly had been struggling in her mindsince morning, like a dim anxiety she had had no time to identify.

She had known it, but she had thought only of his own fate and hispersonal decision, she had thought of him as acting alone. Now she remembereda wider danger and sensed the vast, undefined shape of the enemy she wasfacing.

"You're one of them," she said slowly, "aren't you?""Of whom?"

"Was it you in Ken Danagger's office?"

He smiled. "No." But she noted that he did not ask what she meant."Is there—you would know it—is there actually a destroyer loose in theworld?"

"Of course.""Who is it?""You."

She shrugged; her face was growing hard. "The men who've quit, are theystill alive or dead?"

"They're dead—as far as you're concerned. But there's to be a SecondRenaissance in the world. I'll wait for it."

"No!" The sudden violence of her voice was in personal answer to him, toone of the two things he had wanted her to hear in his words.

"No, don't wait for me!"

"I'll always wait for you, no matter what we do, either one of us."

The sound they heard was the turning of a key in the lock of the entrancedoor. The door opened and Hank Rearden came in.

He stopped briefly on the threshold, then walked slowly into the livingroom, his hand slipping the key into his pocket.

She knew that he had seen Francisco's face before he had seen hers.

He glanced at her, but his eyes came back to Francisco, as if this werethe only face he was now able to see.

It was at Francisco's face that she was afraid to look. The effort shemade to pull her glance along the curve of a few steps felt as if she werepulling a weight beyond her power. Francisco had risen to his feet, as if inthe unhurried, automatic manner of a d'Anconia trained to the code ofcourtesy. There was nothing that Rearden could see in his face. But what shesaw in it was worse than she had feared.

"What are you doing here?" asked Rearden, in the tone one would use toaddress a menial caught in a drawing room.

"I see that I have no right to ask you the same question," said Francisco.She knew what effort was required to achieve the clear, toneless quality ofhis voice. His eyes kept returning to Rearden's right hand, as if he werestill seeing the key between, his fingers.

"Then answer it," said Rearden.

"Hank, any questions you wish to ask should be asked of me," she said.

Rearden did not seem to see or hear her. "Answer it," he repeated.

"There is only one answer which you would have the right to demand," saidFrancisco, "so I will answer you that that is not the reason of my presencehere."

"There is only one reason for your presence in the house of any woman,"said Rearden. "And I mean, any woman—as far as you're concerned. Do you thinkthat I believe it now, that confession of yours or anything you ever said tome? "

"I have given you grounds not to trust me, but none to include MissTaggart."

"Don't tell me that you have no chance here, never had and never will. Iknow it. But that I should find you here on the first—"

"Hank, if you wish to accuse me—" she began, but Rearden whirled to her.

"God, no, Dagny, I don't! But you shouldn't be seen speaking to him. Youshouldn't deal with him in any way. You don't know him. I do." He turned toFrancisco. "What are you after? Are you hoping to include her among your kindof conquests or—"

"No!" It was an involuntary cry and it sounded futile, with its passionatesincerity offered—to be rejected—as its only proof.

"No? Then are you here on a matter of business? Are you setting a trap, asyou -did for me? What sort of double-cross are you preparing for her?"

"My purpose . . . was not ... a matter of business."

"Then what was it?"

"If you still care to believe me, I can tell you only that it involved no. . . betrayal of any kind."

"Do you think that you may still discuss betrayal, in my presence?""I will answer you some day. I cannot answer you now."

"You don't like to be reminded of it, do you? You've stayed away from mesince, haven't you? You didn't expect to see me here? You didn't want to faceme?" But he knew that Francisco was facing him as no one else did these days-he saw the eyes held straight to meet his, the features composed, withoutemotion, without defense or appeal, set to endure whatever was coming—he sawthe open, unprotected look of courage—this was the face of the man he hadloved, the man who had set him free of guilt—and he found himself fightingagainst the knowledge that this face still held him, above all else, abovehis month of impatience for the sight of Dagny. "Why don't you defendyourself, if you have nothing to hide? Why are you here? Why were you stunnedto see me enter?"

"Hank, stop it!" Dagny's voice was a cry, and she drew back, knowing thatviolence was the most dangerous element to introduce into this moment.

Both men turned to her. "Please let me be the one to answer," Franciscosaid quietly.

"I told you that I hoped I'd never see him again," said Rearden.

'Tm sorry if it has to be here. It doesn't concern you, but there'ssomething he must be paid for."

"If that is . . . your purpose," Francisco said with effort, "haven't you. . . achieved it already?"

"What's the matter?" Rearden's face was frozen, his lips barely moving,but his voice had the sound of a chuckle. "Is this your way of asking formercy?"

The instant of silence was Francisco's strain to a greater effort.

"Yes ... if you wish," he answered.

"Did you grant it when you held my future in your hands?"

"You are justified in anything you wish to think of me. But since itdoesn't concern Miss Taggart . . . would you now permit me to leave?"

"No! Do you want to evade it, like all those other cowards? Do you want toescape?"

"I will come anywhere you require any time you wish. But I would rather itwere not in Miss Taggart's presence."

"Why not? I want it to be in her presence, since this is the one place youhad no right to come. I have nothing left to protect from you, you've takenmore than the looters can ever take, you've destroyed everything you'vetouched, but here is one thing you're not -going to touch." He knew that therigid absence of emotion in Francisco's face was the strongest evidence ofemotion, the evidence of some abnormal effort at control—he knew that thiswas torture and that he, Rearden, was driven blindly by a feeling whichresembled a torturer's enjoyment, except that he was now unable to tellwhether he was torturing Francisco or himself. "You're worse than thelooters, because you betray with full understanding of that which you'rebetraying. I don't know what form of corruption is your motive—but I want youto learn that there are things beyond your reach, beyond your aspiration oryour malice."

"You have nothing ... to fear from me . . . now."

"I want you to learn that you are not to think of her, not to look at her,not to approach her. Of all men, it's you who're not to appear in herpresence." He knew that he was driven by a desperate anger at his own feelingfor this man, that the feeling still lived, that it was this feeling which hehad to outrage and destroy. "Whatever your motive, it's from any contact withyou that she has to be protected."

"IE I gave you my word—" He stopped.

Rearden chuckled. "I know what they mean, your words, your convictions,your friendship and your oath by the only woman you ever—"

He stopped. They all knew what this meant, in the same instant thatRearden knew it.

He made a step toward Francisco; he asked, pointing at Dagny, his voicelow and strangely unlike his own voice, as if it neither came from nor wereaddressed to a living person, "Is this the woman you love?"

Francisco closed his eyes.

"Don't ask him that!" The cry was Dagny's.

"Is this the woman you love?"

Francisco answered, looking at her, "Yes."

Rearden's hand rose, swept down and slapped Francisco's face.

The scream came from Dagny. When she could see again—after an instant thatfelt as if the blow had struck her own cheek—Francisco's hands were the firstthing she saw. The heir of the d'Anconias stood thrown back against a table,clasping the edge behind him, not to support himself, but to stop his ownhands. She saw the rigid stillness of his body,, a body that was pulled toostraight but seemed broken, with the slight, unnatural angles of hiswaistline and shoulders, with his arms held stiff but slanted back—he stoodas if the effort not to move were turning the force of his violence againsthimself, as if the motion he resisted were running through his muscles as atearing pain. She saw his convulsed fingers struggling to grow fast to thetable's edge, she wondered which would break first, the wood of the table orthe bones of the man, and she knew that Rearden's life hung in the balance.

When her eyes moved up to Francisco's face, she saw no sign of struggle,only the skin of his temples pulled tight and the planes of his cheeks drawninward, seeming faintly more hollow than usual. It made his face look naked,pure and young. She felt terror because she was seeing in his eyes the tears

which were not there. His eyes were brilliant and dry. He was looking atRearden, but it was not Rearden that he was seeing. He looked as if he werefacing another presence in the room and as if his glance were saying: If thisis what you demand of me, then even this is yours, yours to accept and mineto endure, there is no more than this in me to offer you, but let me be proudto know that I can offer so much. She saw—with a single artery beating underthe skin of his throat, with a froth of pink in the corner of his mouth—

the look of an enraptured dedication which was almost a smile, and sheknew that she was witnessing Francisco d'Anconia's greatest achievement.

When she felt herself shaking and heard her own voice, it seemed to meetthe last echo of her scream in the air of the room—and she realized how briefa moment had passed between. Her voice had the savage sound of rising todeliver a blow and it was crying to Rearden: "—to protect me from him? Longbefore you ever—"

"Don't!" Francisco's head jerked to her, the brief snap of his voice heldall of his unreleased violence, and she knew it was an order that had to beobeyed.

Motionless but for the slow curve of his head, Francisco turned toRearden. She saw his hands leave the edge of the table and hang relaxed byhis sides. It was Rearden that he was now seeing, and there was nothing inFrancisco's face except the exhaustion of effort, but Rearden knew suddenlyhow much this man had loved him.

"Within the extent of your knowledge," Francisco said quietly, "you areright."

Neither expecting nor permitting an answer, he turned to leave. He bowedto Dagny, inclining his head in a manner that appeared as a simple gesture ofleave-taking to Rearden, as a gesture of acceptance to her. Then he left.

Rearden stood looking after him, knowing—without context and with absolutecertainty—that he would give his life for the power not to have committed theaction he had committed.

When he turned to Dagny, his face looked drained, open and faintlyattentive, as if he were not questioning her about the words she had cut off,but were waiting for them to come.

A shudder of pity ran through her body and ended in the movement ofshaking her head: she did not know for which of the two men the pity wasintended, but it made her unable to speak and she shook her head over andover again, as if trying desperately to negate some vast, impersonalsuffering that had made them all its victims.

"If there's something that must be said, say it." His voice was toneless.

The sound she made was half-chuckle, half-moan—it was not a desire forvengeance, but a desperate sense of justice that drove the cutting bitternessof her voice, as she cried, consciously throwing the words at his face, "Youwanted to know the name of that other man?

The man. I slept with? The man who had me first? It was Franciscod'Anconia!"

She saw the force of the blow by seeing his face swept blank. She knewthat if justice was her purpose, she had achieved it—because this slap wasworse than the one he had dealt.

She felt suddenly calm, knowing that her words had had to be said for thesake of all three of them. The despair of a helpless victim left her, she wasnot a victim any longer, she was one of the contestants, willing to bear theresponsibility of action. She stood facing him, waiting for any answer hewould choose to give her, feeling almost as if it were her turn to besubjected to violence.

She did not know what form of torture he was enduring, or what he sawbeing wrecked within him and kept himself the only one to see.

There was no sign of pain to give her any warning; he looked as if he werejust a man who stood still in the middle of a room, making his consciousnessabsorb a fact that it refused to absorb. Then she noticed that he did notchange his posture, that even his hands hung by his sides with the fingershalf-bent as they had been for a long time, it seemed to her that she couldfeel the heavy numbness of the blood stopping in his fingers—and this was theonly clue to his suffering she was able to find, but it told her that thatwhich he felt left him no power to feel anything else, not even the existenceof his own body.

She waited, her pity vanishing and becoming respect.

Then she saw his eyes move slowly from her face down the length of herbody, and she knew the sort of torture he was now choosing to experience,because it was a glance of a nature he could not hide from her. She knew thathe was seeing her as she had been at seventeen, he was seeing her with therival he hated, he was seeing them together as they would be now, a sight hecould neither endure nor resist. She saw the protection of control droppingfrom his face, but he did not care whether he let her see his face alive andnaked, because there now was nothing to read in it except an unrevealingviolence, some part of which resembled hatred.

He seized her shoulders, and she felt prepared to accept that he would nowkill her or beat her into unconsciousness, and in the moment when she feltcertain that he had thought of it, she felt her body thrown against him andhis mouth falling on hers, more brutally than the act of a beating would havepermitted.

She found herself, in terror, twisting her body to resist, and, inexultation, twisting her arms around him, holding him, letting her lips bringblood to his, knowing that she had never wanted him as she did in thismoment.

When he threw her down on the couch, she knew, to the rhythm of the beatof his body, that it was the act of his victory over his rival and of hissurrender to him, the act of ownership brought to unendurable violence by thethought of the man whom it was defying, the act of transforming his hatredfor the pleasure that man had known into the intensity of his own pleasure,his conquest of that man by means of her body—she felt Francisco's presencethrough Rearden's mind, she felt as if she were surrendering to both men, tothat which she had worshipped in both of them, that which they held incommon, that essence of character which had made of her love for each an actof loyalty to both. She knew also that this was his rebellion against theworld around them, against its worship of degradation, against the longtorment of his wasted days and lightless struggle—this was what he wished toassert and, alone with her in the half-darkness high in space above a city ofruins, to hold as the last of his property.

Afterwards, they lay still, his face on her shoulder. The reflection of adistant electric sign kept beating in faint flashes on the ceiling above herhead.

He reached for her hand and slipped her fingers under his face to let hismouth rest against her palm for a moment, so gently that she felt his motivemore than his touch.

After a while, she got up, she reached for a cigarette, lighted it, thenheld it out to him with a slight, questioning lift of her hand; he nodded,still sitting half-stretched on the couch; she placed the cigarette betweenhis lips and lighted another for herself. She felt a great sense of peacebetween them, and the intimacy of the unimportant gestures underscored theimportance of the things they were not saying to each other. Everything wassaid, she thought—but knew that it waited to be acknowledged.

She saw his eyes move to the entrance door once in a while and remain onit for long moments, as if he were still seeing the man who had left.

He said quietly, "He could have beaten me by letting me have the truth,any time he wished. Why didn't he?"

She shrugged, spreading her hands in a gesture of helpless sadness,because they both knew the answer. She asked, "He did mean a great deal toyou, didn't he?"

"He does."

The two dots of fire at the tips of their cigarettes had moved slowly tothe tips of their fingers, with the small glow of an occasional flare and thesoft crumbling of ashes as sole movement in the silence, when the doorbellrang. They knew that it was not the man they wished but could not hope to seereturn, and she frowned with sudden anger as she went to open the door. Ittook her a moment to remember that the innocuously courteous figure she sawbowing to her with a standard smile of welcome was the assistant manager ofthe apartment house.

"Good evening, Miss Taggart. We're so glad to see you back. I just came onduty and heard that you had returned and wanted to greet you in person."

"Thank you." She stood at the door, not moving to admit him.

"I have a letter that came for you about a week ago, Miss Taggart, "

he said, reaching into his pocket. "It looked as if it might be important,but being marked 'personal,' it was obviously not intended to be sent to youroffice and, besides, they did not know your address, either—so not knowingwhere to forward it, I kept it in our safe and I thought I'd deliver it toyou in person."

The envelope he handed to her was marked: Registered—Air Mail —SpecialDelivery—Personal. The return address said: Quentin Daniels, Utah Instituteof Technology;. Afton, Utah.

"Oh . . . Thank you."

The assistant manager noted that her voice went dropping toward a whisper,the polite disguise for a gasp, he noted that she stood looking down at thesender's name much longer than was necessary, so he repeated his good wishesand departed.

She was tearing the envelope open as she walked toward Rearden, and shestopped in the middle of the room to read the letter. It was typewritten onthin paper—he could see the black rectangles of the paragraphs through thetransparent sheets—and he could see her face as she read them.

He expected it, by the time he saw her come to the end: she leaped to thetelephone, he heard the violent whirl of the dial and her voice saying withtrembling urgency, "Long-distance, please . . . Operator, get me the UtahInstitute of Technology at Afton, Utah!"

He asked, approaching, "What is it?"

She extended the letter, not looking at him, her eyes fixed on thetelephone, as if she could force it to answer.

The letter said: Dear Miss Taggart: I have fought it out for three weeks,I did not want to do it, I know how this will hit you and I know everyargument you could offer me, because I have used them all against myself—butthis is to tell you that I am quitting.

I cannot work under the terms of Directive 10-289—though not for thereason its perpetrators intended. I know that their abolition of allscientific research does not mean a damn to you or me, and that you wouldwant me to continue. But I have to quit, because I do not wish to succeed anylonger.

I do not wish to work in a world that regards me as a slave. I do not wishto be of any value to people. If I succeeded in rebuilding the motor, I wouldnot let you place it in their service. I would not take it upon my consciencethat anything produced by my mind should be used to bring them comfort.

I know that if we succeed, they will be only too eager to expropriate themotor. And for the sake of that prospect, we have to accept the position of

criminals, you and I, and live under the threat of being arrested at anymoment at their whim. And this is the thing that I cannot take, even were Iable to take all the rest: that in order to give them an inestimable benefit,we should be made martyrs to the men who, but for us, could not haveconceived of it. I might have forgiven the rest, but when I think of this, Isay: May they be damned, I will see them all die of starvation, myselfincluded, rather than forgive them for this or permit it!

To tell you the full truth, I want to succeed, to solve the secret of themotor, as much as ever. So I shall continue to work on it for my own solepleasure and for as long as I last. But if I solve it, it will remain myprivate secret. I will not release it for any commercial use. Therefore, Icannot take your money any longer.

Commercialism is supposed to be despicable, so all those people shouldtruly approve of my decision, and I—I'm tired of helping those who despiseme.

I don't know how long I will last or what I will do in the future.

For the moment, I intend to remain in my job at this Institute.

But if any of its trustees or receivers should remind me that I am nowlegally forbidden to cease being a janitor, I will 'quit.

You had given me my greatest chance and if I am now giving you a painfulblow, perhaps T should ask you to forgive me, I think that you love your workas much as I loved mine, so you will know that my decision was not easy tomake, but that I had to make it.

It is a strange feeling—writing this letter. I do not intend to die, but Iam giving up the world and this feels like the letter of a suicide. So I wantto say that of all the people I have known, you are the only person I regretleaving behind.

Sincerely yours, Quentin Daniels When he looked up from the letter, heheard her saying, as he had heard her through the words of the typewrittenlines, her voice rising closer to despair each time: "Keep ringing, Operator!. . . Please keep ringing!"

"What can you tell him?" he asked. "There are no arguments to offer."

"I won't have a chance to tell him! He's gone by now. It was a week ago.I'm sure he's gone. They've got him."

"Who got him?"

"Yes, Operator, I'll hold the line, keep trying!""What would you tell him if he answered?"

"I'd beg him to go on taking my money, with no strings attached, noconditions, just so he'll have the means to continue! I'll promise him thatif we're still in a looters' world when and if he succeeds, I won't ask himto give me the motor or even to tell me its secret. But if, by that time,we're free—" She stopped.

"If we're free . . ."

"All I want from him now is that he doesn't give up and vanish, like . . .like all those others. I don't want to let them get him. If it's not toolate—oh God, I don't want them to get him! . . . Yes, Operator, keepringing!"

"What good will it do us, even if he continues to work?"

"That's all I'll beg him to do—just to continue. Maybe we'll never get achance to use the motor in the future. But I want to know that somewhere inthe world there's still a great brain at work on a great attempt—and that westill have a chance at a future. , , . If that motor is abandoned again, thenthere's nothing but Starnesville ahead of us."

"Yes. I know."

She held the receiver pressed to her ear, her arm stiff with the effortnot to tremble. She waited, and he heard, in the silence, the futile clickingof the unanswered call.

"He's gone," she said. 'They got him. A week is much longer than theyneed. I don't know how they learn when the time is right, but this"

—she pointed at the letter—"this was their time and they wouldn't havemissed it."

"Who?"

"The destroyer's agents,"

"Are you beginning to think that they really exist?""Yes."

"Are you serious?"

"I am. I've met one of them."

"Who?"

"I'll tell you later. I don't know who their leader is, but I'm going tofind out, one of these days. I'm going to find out. I'll be damned if I letthem-"

She broke off on a gasp; he saw the change in her face the moment beforehe heard the click of a distant receiver being lifted and the sound of aman's voice saying, across the wire, "Hello?"

"Daniels! Is that you? You're alive? You're still there?"

"Why, yes. Is this you, Miss Taggart? What's the matter?"

"I ... I thought you were gone."

"Oh, I'm sorry, I just heard the phone ringing, I was out in the back lot,gathering carrots."

'"Carrots?" She was laughing with hysterical relief.

"I have my own vegetable patch out there. Used to be the Institute'sparking lot. Are you calling from New York, Miss Taggart?"

"Yes. I just received your letter. Just now. I ... I had been away."

"Oh." There was a pause, then he said quietly, "There's really nothingmore to be said about it, Miss Taggart."

"Tell me, are you going away?"

"No. "

"You're not planning to go?""No. Where?"

"Do you intend to remain at the Institute?""Yes."

"For how long? Indefinitely?""Yes—as far as I know.""Has anyone approached you?""About what?""About leaving.""No. Who?"

"Listen, Daniels, I won't try to discuss your letter over the phone.But I must speak to you. I'm coming to see you. I'll get there as fast asI can."

"I don't want you to do that, Miss Taggart. I don't want you to go to suchan effort, when it's useless."

"Give me a chance, won't you? You don't have to promise to change yourmind, you don't have to commit yourself to anything—only to give me ahearing. If I want to come, it's my risk, I'm taking it. There are things Iwant to say to you, I'm asking you only-for the chance to say them."

"You know that I will always give you that chance, Miss Taggart."

"I'm leaving for Utah at once. Tonight. But there's one thing I want youto promise me. Will you promise to wait for me? Will you promise to be therewhen I arrive?"

"Why ... of course, Miss Taggart. Unless I die or something happensoutside my power—but I don't expect it to happen."

"Unless you die, will you wait for me no matter what happens?""Of course."

"Do you give me your word that you'll wait?""Yes, Miss Taggart.""Thank you. Good night.""Good night, Miss Taggart."

She pressed the receiver down and picked it up again in the same sweep ofher hand and rapidly dialed a number.

"Eddie? . . . Have them hold the Comet for me. . . . Yes, tonight's Comet.Give orders to have my car attached, then come here, to my place, at once,"She glanced at her watch. "It's eight-twelve. I have an hour to make it. Idon't think I'll hold them up too long. I'll talk to you while I pack."

She hung up and turned to Rearden.

"Tonight?" he said.

"I have to."

"I guess so. Don't you have to go to Colorado, anyway?"

"Yes. I intended to leave tomorrow night. But I think Eddie can manage totake care of my office, and I'd better start now. It takes three days"—sheremembered—"it will now take five days to reach Utah.

I have to go by train, there are people I have to see on the line—thiscan't be delayed, either."

"How long will you stay in Colorado?"

"Hard to tell."

"Wire me when you get there, will you? If it looks as if it's going to belong, I'll join you there."

This was the only expression he could give to the words he had desperatelywished to say to her, had waited for, had come here to say, and now wished topronounce more than ever, but knew that it must not be said tonight.

She knew, by a faint, solemn stress in the tone of his voice, that thiswas his acceptance of her confession, his surrender, his forgiveness. Sheasked, "Can you leave the mills?"

"It will take me a few days to arrange, but I can."

He knew what her words were admitting, acknowledging and forgiving him,when she said, "Hank, why don't you meet me in Colorado in a week? If you flyyour plane, we'll both get there at the same time. And then we'll come backtogether."

"All right . . . dearest."

She dictated a list of instructions, while pacing her bedroom, gatheringher clothes, hastily packing a suitcase. Rearden had left; Eddie Willers satat her dressing table, making notes. He seemed to work in his usual manner ofunquestioning efficiency, as if he were not aware of the perfume bottles andpowder boxes, as if the dressing table were a desk and the room were only anoffice.

'I'll phone you from Chicago, Omaha, Flagstaff and Afton," she said,tossing underwear into the suitcase. "If you need me in between, call anyoperator along the line, with orders to flag the train."

"The Comet?" he asked mildly.

"Hell, yes!-the Comet."

"Okay."

"Don't hesitate to call, if you have to.""Okay. But I don't think I'll have to."

"We'll manage. We'll work by long-distance phone, just as we did when we—"She stopped.

"—when we were building the John Gait Line?" he asked quietly.

They glanced at each other, but said nothing else.

"What's the latest report on the construction crews?" she asked.

"Everything's under way. I got word, just after you left the office, thatthe grading gangs have started—out of Laurel, Kansas, and out of Jasper,Oklahoma. The rail is on its way to them from Silver Springs.

It will be all right. The hardest thing to find was—M"The men?"

"Yes. The men to put in charge. We had trouble out West, over the Elgin toMidland stretch. All the men we were counting on are gone. I couldn't findanyone able to assume responsibility, neither on our line nor elsewhere. Ieven tried to get Dan Conway, but—"

"Dan Conway?" she asked, stopping.

"Yes. I did. I tried. Do you remember how he used to have rail laid at therate of five miles a day, right in that part of the country? Oh, I know he'dhave reason to hate our guts, but what does it matter now?

I found him—he's living on a ranch out in Arizona. I phoned him myself andI begged him to save us. Just to take charge, for one night, of building fiveand a half miles of track. Five and a half miles, Dagny, that we're stuckwith—and he's the greatest railroad builder living! I told him that I wasasking him to do it as a gesture of charity to us, if he would. You know, Ithink he understood me. He wasn't angry. He sounded sad. But he wouldn't doit. He said one must not try to bring people back out of the grave. ... Hewished me luck. I think he meant it. . . . You know, I don't think he's oneof those that the destroyer knocked out. I think he just broke by himself."

"Yes. I know he did."

Eddie saw the expression on her face and pulled himself up hastily.

"Oh, we finally found a man to put in charge at Elgin," he said, forcinghis voice to sound confident. "Don't worry, the track will be built longbefore you get there."

She glanced at him with the faint suggestion of a smile, thinking of howoften she had said these words to him and of the desperate bravery with whichhe was now trying to tell her: Don't worry. He caught her glance, heunderstood, and the answering hint of his smile had a touch of embarrassedapology.

He turned back to his note pad, feeling anger at himself, sensing that hehad broken his own unstated commandment: Don't make it harder for her. Heshould not have told her about Dan Conway, he thought; he should not havesaid anything to remind them both of the despair they would feel, if theyfelt. He wondered what was the matter with him: he thought it inexcusablethat he should find his discipline slipping just because this was a room, notan office.

She went on speaking—and he listened, looking down at his pad, making abrief notation once in a while. He did not permit himself to look at heragain.

She threw the door of her closet open, jerked a suit off a hanger andfolded it rapidly, while her voice went on with unhurried precision.

He did not look up, he was aware of her only by means of sound: the soundof the swift movements and of the measured voice. He knew what was wrong withhim, he thought; he did not want her to leave, he did not want to lose heragain, after so brief a moment of reunion. But to indulge any personalloneliness, at a time when he knew how desperately the railroad needed her inColorado, was an act of disloyalty he had never committed before—and he felta vague, desolate sense of guilt.

('Send out orders that the Comet is to stop at every division point,"

she said, "and that all division superintendents are to prepare for me areport on—"

He glanced up—then his glance stopped and he did not hear the rest of thewords. He saw a man's dressing gown hanging on the back of the open closetdoor, a dark blue gown with the white initials HR on its breast pocket.

He remembered where he had seen that gown before, he remembered the manfacing him across a breakfast table in the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, heremembered that man coming, unannounced, to her office late on a Thanksgiving

night—and the realization that he should have known it, came to him as twosubterranean jolts of a single earthquake: it came with a feeling thatscreamed "No!" so savagely that the scream, not the sight, brought down everygirder within him. It was not the shock of the discovery, but the moreterrible shock of what it made him discover about himself.

He hung on to a single thought; that he must not let her see what he hadnoticed or what it had done to him. He felt a sensation of embarrassmentmagnified to the point of physical torture; it was the dread of violating herprivacy twice: by learning her secret and by revealing his own. He bent lowerover the note pad and concentrated on an immediate purpose: to stop hispencil from shaking.

". . . fifty miles of mountain trackage to build, and we can count onnothing but whatever material we own."

"I beg your pardon," he said, his voice barely audible, "I didn't hearwhat you said."

"I said I want a report from all superintendents on every foot of rail andevery piece of equipment available on their divisions.""Okay."

"I will confer with each one of them in turn. Have them meet me in my caraboard the Comet.""Okay."

"Send word out—unofficially—that the engineers are to make up time for thestops by going seventy, eighty, a hundred miles an hour, anything they wishas and when they need to, and that I will . . .

Eddie?"

"Yes. Okay."

"Eddie, what's the matter?"

He had to look up, to face her and, desperately, to lie for the first timein his life. "I'm . . . I'm afraid of the trouble we'll get into with thelaw," he said.

"Forget it. Don't you see that there isn't any law left? Anything goesnow, for whoever can get away with it—and, for the moment, it's we who'resetting the terms."

When she was ready, he carried her suitcase to a taxicab, then down theplatform of the Taggart Terminal to her office car, the last at the end ofthe Comet. He stood on the platform, saw the train jerk forward and watchedthe red markers on the back of her car slipping slowly away from him into thelong darkness of the exit tunnel. When they were gone, he felt what one feelsat the loss of a dream one had not known till after it was lost.

There were few people on the platform around him and they seemed to movewith self-conscious strain, as if a sense of disaster clung to the rails andto the girders above their heads. He thought indifferently that after acentury of safety, men were once more regarding the departure of a train asan event involving a gamble with death.

He remembered that he had had no dinner, and he felt no desire to eat, butthe underground cafeteria of the Taggart Terminal was more truly his homethan the empty cube of space he now thought of as his apartment—so he walkedto the cafeteria, because he had no other place to go.

The cafeteria was almost deserted—but the first thing he saw, as heentered, was a thin column of smoke rising from the cigarette of the worker,who sat alone at a table in a dark corner.

Not noticing what he put on his tray, Eddie carried it to the worker'stable, said, "Hello," sat down and said nothing else. He looked at thesilverware spread before him, wondered about its purpose, remembered the useof a fork and attempted to perform the motions of eating, but found that itwas beyond his power. After a while, he looked up and saw that the worker'seyes were studying him attentively.

"No," said Eddie, "no, there's nothing the matter with me. . . .

Oh yes, a lot has happened, but what difference does it make now?

. . . Yes, she's back. . . . What else do you want me to say about it? . .. How did you know she's back? Oh well, I suppose the whole company knew itwithin the first ten minutes. . . . No, I don't know whether I'm glad thatshe's back. . . . Sure, she'll save the railroad—

for another year or month. . . . What do you want me to say? . . .

No, she didn't. She didn't tell me what she's counting on. She didn't tellme what she thought or felt. . . . Well, how do you suppose she'd feel? It'shell for her—all right, for me, too! Only my kind of hell is my own fault. .. . No. Nothing. I can't talk about it—talk?—I mustn't even think about it,I've got to stop it, stop thinking of her and—of her, I mean."

He remained silent and he wondered why the worker's eyes—the eyes thatalways seemed to see everything within him—made him feel uneasy tonight. Heglanced down at the table, and he noticed the butts of many cigarettes amongthe remnants of food on the worker's plate.

"Are you in trouble, too?" asked Eddie. "Oh, just that you've sat here fora long time tonight, haven't you? . . . For me? Why should you have wanted towait for me? . . . You know, I never thought you cared whether you saw me ornot, me or anybody, you seemed so complete in yourself, and that's why Iliked to talk to you, because I felt that you always understood, but nothingcould hurt you—you looked as if nothing had ever hurt you—and it made me feelfree, as if . . .as if there were no pain in the world. ... Do you knowwhat's strange about your face? You look as if you've never known pain orfear or guilt. . . .I'm sorry I'm so late tonight. I had to see her off—shehas just left, on the Comet. . . . Yes, tonight, just now.

. . . Yes, she's gone. . . . Yes, it was a sudden decision—within the pasthour. She intended to leave tomorrow night, but something unexpected happenedand she had to go at once. . . . Yes, she's going to Colorado—afterwards. . .. To Utah—first. . . . Because she got a letter from Quentin Daniels thathe's quitting—and the one thing she won't give up, couldn't stand to give up,is the motor. You remember, the motor I told you about, the remnant that shefound. . . . Daniels?

He's a physicist who's been working for the past year, at the UtahInstitute of Technology, trying to solve the secret of the motor and torebuild it. . . . Why do you look at me like that? . . . No, I haven't toldyou about him before, because it was a secret. It was a private, secretproject of her own—and of what interest would it have been to you, anyway? .. . I guess I can talk about it now, because he's quit. . . . Yes, he toldher his reasons. He said that he won't give anything produced by his mind toa world that regards him as a slave.

He said that he won't be made a martyr to people in exchange for givingthem an inestimable benefit. . . . What—what are you laughing at? . . . Stopit, will you? Why do you laugh like that? . . . The whole secret? What do youmean, the whole secret? He hasn't found the whole secret of the motor, ifthat's what you meant, but he seemed to be doing well, he had a good chance.Now it's lost. She's rushing to him, she wants to plead, to hold him, to makehim go on—but I think it's useless. Once they stop, they don't come backagain. Not one of them has. . . . No, I don't care, not any more, we've takenso many losses that I'm getting used to it. ... Oh no! It's not Danielsthat I can't take, it's—no, drop it. Don't question me about it. The wholeworld is going to pieces, she's still fighting to save it, and I—I sit heredamning her for something I had no right to know. . . . No! She's donenothing to be damned, nothing—and, besides, it doesn't concern the railroad.. . . Don't pay any attention to me, it's not true, it's not her that I'mdamning, it's myself. . . . Listen, I've always known that you loved TaggartTranscontinental as I loved it, that it meant something special to you,

something personal, and that was why you liked to hear me talk about it. Butthis—the thing I learned today—this has nothing to do with the railroad. Itwould be of no importance to you.

Forget it. . . . It's something that I didn't know about her, that's all.

. . . I grew up with her. I thought I knew her. I didn't. ... I don'tknow what it was that I expected. I suppose I just thought that she had noprivate life of any kind. To me, she was not a person and not . . . not awoman. She was the railroad. And I didn't think that anyone would ever havethe audacity to look at her in any other way.

. . . Well, it serves me right. Forget it. . . . Forget it, I said! Why doyou question me like this? It's only her private life. What can it matter toyou? . . . Drop it, for God's sake! Don't you see that I can't talk about it?. . . Nothing happened, nothing's wrong with me, I just —oh, why am I lying?I can't lie to you, you always seem to see everything, it's worse than tryingto lie to myself! ... I have lied to myself. I didn't know what I felt forher. The railroad? I'm a rotten hypocrite. If the railroad was all she meantto me, it wouldn't have hit me like this. I wouldn't have felt that I wantedto kill him! . . .

What's the matter with you tonight? Why do you look at me like that?

. . . Oh, what's the matter with all of us? Why is there nothing butmisery left for anyone? Why do we suffer so much? We weren't meant to. Ialways thought that we were to be happy, all of us, as our natural fate. Whatare we doing? What have we lost? A year ago, I wouldn't have damned her forfinding something she wanted. But I know that they're doomed, both of them,and so am I, and so is everybody, and she was all I had left. ... It was sogreat, to be alive, it was such a wonderful chance, I didn't know that Iloved it and that that was our love, hers and mine and yours—but the world isperishing and we cannot stop it. Why are we destroying ourselves? Who willtell us the truth? Who will save us? Oh, who is John Gait?! . . . No, it's nouse.

It doesn't matter now. Why should I feel anything? We won't last muchlonger. Why should I care what she does? Why should I care that she'ssleeping with Hank Rearden? ... Oh God!—what's the matter with you? Don'tgo! Where are you going?"

CHAPTER XTHE SIGN OF THE DOLLAR

She sat at the window of the train, her head thrown back, not moving,wishing she would never have to move again.

The telegraph poles went racing past the window, but the train seemed lostin a void, between a brown stretch of prairie and a solid spread of rusty,graying clouds. The twilight was draining the sky without the wound of asunset; it looked more like the fading of an anemic body in the process ofexhausting its last drops of blood and light. The train was going west, as ifit, too, were pulled to follow the sinking rays and quietly to vanish fromthe earth. She sat still, feeling no desire to resist it.

She wished she would not hear the sound of the wheels. They knocked in aneven rhythm, every fourth knock accented—and it seemed to her that throughthe rapid, running clatter of some futile stampede to escape, the beat of theaccented knocks was like the steps of an enemy moving toward some inexorablepurpose.

She had never experienced it before, this sense of apprehension at thesight of a prairie, this feeling that the rail was only a fragile threadstretched across an enormous emptiness, like a worn nerve ready to break. Shehad never expected that she, who had felt as if she were the motive poweraboard a train, would now sit wishing, like a child or a savage, that thistrain would move, that it would not stop, that it would get her there ontime—wishing it, not like an act of will, but like a plea to a dark unknown.

She thought of what a difference one month had made. She had seen it inthe faces of the men at the stations. The track workers, the switchmen, theyardmen, who had always greeted her, anywhere along the line, their cheerfulgrins boasting that they knew who she was—had now looked at her stonily,turning away, their faces wary and closed.

She had wanted to cry to them in apology, "It's not I who've done it toyou!"—then had remembered that she had accepted it and that they now had theright to hate her, that she was both a slave and a driver of slaves, and sowas every human being in the country, and hatred was the only thing that mencould now feel for one another.

She had found reassurance, for two days, in the sight of the cities movingpast her window—the factories, the bridges, the electric signs, thebillboards pressing down upon the roofs of homes—the crowded, grimy, active,living conflux of the industrial East.

But the cities had been left behind. The train was now diving into theprairies of Nebraska, the rattle of its couplers sounding as if it wereshivering with cold. She saw lonely shapes that had been farmhouses in thevacant stretches that had been fields. But the great burst of energy, in theEast, generations ago, had splattered bright trickles to run through theemptiness; some were gone, but some still lived.

She was startled when the lights of a small town swept across her car and,vanishing, left it darker than it had been before. She would not move to turnon the light. She sat still, watching the rare towns. Whenever an electricbeam went flashing briefly at her face, it was like a moment's greeting.

She saw them as they went by, written on the walls of modest structures,over sooted roofs, down slender smokestacks, on the curves of tanks: ReynoldsHarvesters—Macey Cement—Quinlan & Jones Pressed Alfalfa—Home of the CrawfordMattress—Benjamin Wylie Grain and Feed—words raised like flags to the emptydarkness of the sky, the motionless forms of movement, of effort, of courage,of hope, the monuments to how much had been achieved on the edge of nature'svoid by men who had once been free to achieve—she saw the homes built inscattered privacy, the small shops, the wide streets with electric lighting,

like a few luminous strokes criss-crossed on the black sheet of thewastelands—she saw the ghosts between, the remnants of towns, the skeletonsof factories with crumbling smokestacks, the corpses of shops with brokenpanes, the slanting poles with shreds of wire—she saw a sudden blaze, therare sight of a gas station, a glittering white island of glass and metalunder the huge black weight of space and sky —she saw an ice-cream cone madeof radiant tubing, hanging above the corner of a street, and a battered carbeing parked below, with a young boy at the wheel and a girl stepping out,her white dress blowing in the summer wind—she shuddered for the two of them,thinking: I can't look at you, I who know what it has taken to give you youryouth, to give you this evening, this car and the ice-cream cone you're goingto buy for a quarter—she saw, on the edge beyond a town, a building glowingwith tiers of pale blue light, the industrial light she loved, with thesilhouettes of machines in its windows and a billboard in the darkness aboveits roof—and suddenly her head fell on her arm, and she sat shaking, cryingsoundlessly to the night, to herself, to whatever was human in any livingbeing: Don't let it go! . . . Don't let it go! . . .

She jumped to her feet and snapped on the light. She stood still, fightingto regain control, knowing that such moments were her greatest danger. Thelights of the town were past, her window was now an empty rectangle, and sheheard, in the silence, the progression of the fourth knocks, the steps of theenemy moving on, not to be hastened or stopped.

In desperate need of the sight of some living activity, she decided shewould not order dinner in her car, but would go to the diner. As if stressingand mocking her loneliness, a voice came back to her mind: "But you would notrun trains if they were empty." Forget it!—she told herself angrily, walkinghastily to the door of her car.

She was astonished, approaching her vestibule, to hear the sound of voicesclose by. As she pulled the door open, she heard a shout: "Get off, God damnyou! "

An aging tramp had taken refuge in the corner of her vestibule.

He sat on the floor, his posture suggesting that he had no strength leftto stand up or to care about being caught. He was looking at the conductor,his eyes observant, fully conscious, but devoid of any reaction. The trainwas slowing down for a bad stretch of track, the conductor had opened thedoor to a cold gust of wind, and was waving at the speeding black void,ordering, "Get going! Get off as you got on or I'll kick you off head first!"

There was no astonishment in the tramp's face, no protest, no anger, nohope; he looked as if he had long since abandoned any judgment of any humanaction. He moved obediently to rise, his hand groping upward along the rivetsof the car's wall. She saw him glance at her and glance away, as if she weremerely another inanimate fixture of the train. He did not seem to be aware ofher person, any more than of his own, he was indifferently ready to complywith an order which, in his condition, meant certain death.

She glanced at the conductor. She saw nothing in his face except the blindmalevolence of pain, of some long-repressed anger that broke out upon thefirst object available, almost without consciousness of the object'sidentity. The two men were not human beings to each other any longer.

The tramp's suit was a mass of careful patches on a cloth so stiff andshiny with wear that one expected it to crack like glass if bent; but shenoticed the collar of his shirt: it was bone-white from repeated launderingand it still preserved a semblance of shape. He had pulled himself up to hisfeet, he was looking indifferently at the black hole open upon miles ofuninhabited wilderness where no one would see the body or hear the voice of amangled man, but the only gesture of concern he made was to tighten his gripon a small, dirty bundle, as if to make sure he would not lose it in leapingoff the train.

It was the laundered collar and this gesture for the last of hispossessions—the gesture of a sense of property—that made her feel an emotionlike a sudden, burning twist within her. "Wait," she said.

The two men turned to her.

"Let him be my guest," she said to the conductor, and held her door openfor the tramp, ordering, "Come in."

The tramp followed her, obeying as blankly as he had been about to obeythe conductor.

He stood in the middle of her car, holding his bundle, looking around himwith the same observant, unreacting glance."Sit down," she said.

He obeyed—and looked at her, as if waiting for further orders.

There was a kind of dignity in his manner, the honesty of the openadmission that he had no claim to make, no plea to offer, no questions toask, that he now had to accept whatever was done to him and was ready toaccept it.

He seemed to be in his early fifties; the structure of his bones and thelooseness of his suit suggested that he had once been muscular.

The lifeless indifference of his eyes did not fully hide that they hadbeen intelligent; the wrinkles cutting his face with the record of someincredible bitterness, had not fully erased the fact that the face had oncepossessed the kindliness peculiar to honesty.

"When did you eat last?" she asked.

"Yesterday," he said, and added, "I think."

She rang for the porter and ordered dinner for two, to be brought to hercar from the diner.

The tramp had watched her silently, but when the porter departed, heoffered the only payment it was in his power to offer: "I don't want to getyou in trouble, ma'am," he said.

She smiled. "What trouble?"

"You're traveling with one of those railroad tycoons, aren't you?""No, alone."

"Then you're the wife of one of them?""No. "

"Oh." She saw his effort at a look of something like respect, as if tomake up for having forced an improper confession, and she laughed.

"No, not that, either. I guess I'm one of the tycoons myself. My name isDagny Taggart and I work for this railroad."

"Oh ... I think I've heard of you, ma'am—in the old days." It was hardto tell what "the old days" meant to him, whether it was a month or a year orwhatever period of time had passed since he had given up. He was looking ather with a sort of interest in the past tense, as if he were thinking thatthere had been a time when he would have considered her a personage worthseeing. "You were the lady who ran a railroad," he said.

"Yes," she said. "I was."

He showed no sign of astonishment at the fact that she had chosen to helphim. He looked as if so much brutality had confronted him that he had givenup the attempt to understand, to trust or to expect anything.

"When did you get aboard the train?" she asked.

"Back at the division point, ma'am. Your door wasn't locked." He added, "Ifigured maybe nobody would notice me till morning on account of it being aprivate car."

"Where are you going?"

"I don't know." Then, almost as if he sensed that this could sound toomuch like an appeal for pity, he added, "I guess I just wanted to keep movingtill I saw some place that looked like there might be a chance to find workthere." This was his attempt to assume the responsibility of a purpose,

rather than to throw the burden of his aimlessness upon her mercy—an attemptof the same order as his shirt collar.

"What kind of work are you looking for?"

"People don't look for kinds of work any more, ma'am," he answeredimpassively. "They just look for work."

"What sort of place did you hope to find?"

"Oh . . . well . . . where there's factories, I guess."

"Aren't you going in the wrong direction for that? The factories are inthe East."

"No." He said it with the firmness of knowledge. "There are too manypeople in the East. The factories are too well watched. I figured there mightbe a better chance some place where there's fewer people and less law."

"Oh, running away? A fugitive from the law, are you?"

"Not as you'd mean it in the old days, ma'am. But as things are now, Iguess I am. I want to work.""What do you mean?"

"There aren't any jobs back East. And a man couldn't give you a job, if hehad one to give—he'd go to jail for it. He's watched. You can't get workexcept through the Unification Board. The Unification Board has a gang of itsown friends waiting in line for the jobs, more friends than a millionaire'sgot relatives. Well, me—I haven't got either."

"Where did you work last?"

"I've been bumming around the country for six months—no, longer, I guess—Iguess it's closer to about a year—I can't tell any more—

mostly day work it was. Mostly on farms. But it's getting to be no usenow. I know how the farmers look at you—they don't like to see a manstarving, but they're only one jump ahead of starvation themselves, theyhaven't any work to give you, they haven't any food, and whatever they save,if the tax collectors don't get it, then the raiders do—you know, the gangsthat rove all through the country-deserters, they call them."

"Do you think that it's any better in the West?""No. I don't."

"Then why are you going there?"

"Because I haven't tried it before. That's all there is left to try. It'ssomewhere to go. Just to keep moving . . . You know," he added suddenly, "Idon't think it will be any use. But there's nothing to do in the East exceptsit under some hedge and wait to die. I don't think I'd mind it much now, thedying. I know it would be a lot easier. Only I think that it's a sin to sitdown and let your life go, without making a try for it."

She thought suddenly of those modern college-infected parasites whoassumed a sickening air of moral self-righteousness whenever they uttered thestandard bromides about their concern for the welfare of others. The tramp'slast sentence was one of the most profoundly moral statements she had everheard; but the man did not know it; he had said it in his impassive,extinguished voice, simply, dryly, as a matter of fact.

"What part of the country do you come from?" she asked.

"Wisconsin," he answered.

The waiter came in, bringing their dinner. He set a table and courteouslymoved two chairs, showing no astonishment at the nature of the occasion.

She looked at the table; she thought that the magnificence of a worldwhere men could afford the time and the effortless concern for such things asstarched napkins and tinkling ice cubes, offered to travelers along withtheir meals for the price of a few dollars, was a remnant of the age when thesustenance of one's life had not been made a crime and a meal had not been amatter of running a race with death—a remnant which was soon to vanish, likethe white filling station on the edge of the weeds of the jungle.

She noticed that the tramp, who had lost the strength to stand up, had notlost the respect for the meaning of the things spread before him. He did notpounce upon the food; he fought to keep his movements slow, to unfold hisnapkin, to pick up his fork in tempo with hers, his hand shaking—as if hestill knew that this, no matter what indignity was ever forced upon them, wasthe manner proper to men.

"What was your line of work—in the old days?" she asked, when the waiterleft. "Factories, wasn't it?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"What trade?"

"Skilled lathe-operator."

"Where did you work at it last?"

"In Colorado, ma'am. For the Hammond Car Company.""Oh . . . !""Ma'am?"

"No, nothing. Worked there long?""No, ma'am. Just two weeks.""How come?"

"Well, I'd waited a year for it, hanging around Colorado just to get thatjob. They had a waiting list too, the Hammond Car Company, only they didn'tgo by friendships and they didn't go by seniority, they went by a man'srecord. I had a good record. But it was just two weeks after I got the jobthat Lawrence Hammond quit. He quit and disappeared. They closed the plant.Afterwards, there was a citizens'

committee that reopened it. I got called back. But five days was all itlasted. They started layoffs just about at once. By seniority. So I had togo. I heard they lasted for about three months, the citizens'

committee. Then they had to close the plant for good."

"Where did you work before that?"

"Just about in every Eastern state, ma'am. But it was never more than amonth or two. The plants kept closing."

"Did that happen on every job you've held?"

He glanced at her, as if he understood her question. "No, ma'am," heanswered and, for the first time, she caught a faint echo of pride in hisvoice. "The first job I had, I held it for twenty years. Not the same job,but the same place, I mean—I got to be shop foreman. That was twelve yearsago. Then the owner of the plant died, and the heirs who took it over, ran itinto the ground. Times were bad then, but it was since then that thingsstarted going to pieces everywhere faster and faster. Since then, it seemslike anywhere I turned—the place cracked and went. At first, we thought itwas only one state or another. A lot of us thought that Colorado would last.But it went, too.

Anything you tried, anything you touched—it fell. Anywhere you looked,work was stopping—the factories were stopping—the machines were stopping—" headded slowly, in a whisper, as if seeing some secret terror of his own, "themotors . . . were . . . stopping." His voice rose: "Oh God, who is—" andbroke off.

"-John Gait?" she asked.

"Yes," he said, and shook his head as if to dispel some vision, "only Idon't like to say that."

"I don't, either. I wish I knew why people are saying it and who startedit. "

"That's it, ma'am. That's what I'm afraid of. It might have been me whostarted it.""What?"

"Me or about six thousand others. We might have. I think we did.I hope we're wrong."

"What do you mean?"

"Well, there was something that happened at that plant where I worked fortwenty years. It was when the old man died and his heirs took over. Therewere three of them, two sons and a daughter, and they brought a new plan torun the factory. They let us vote on it, too, and everybody—almost everybody—voted for it. We didn't know. We thought it was good. No, that's not true,either. We thought that we were supposed to think it was good. The plan wasthat everybody in the factory would work according to his ability, but wouldbe paid according to his need. We—what's the matter, ma'am? Why do you looklike that?"

"What was the name of the factory?" she asked, her voice barely audible."The Twentieth Century Motor Company, ma'am, of Starnesville, Wisconsin.""Go on."

"We voted for that plan at a big meeting, with all of us present, sixthousand of us, everybody that worked in the factory. The Starnes heirs madelong speeches about it, and it wasn't too clear, but nobody asked anyquestions. None of us knew just how the plan would work, but every one of usthought that the next fellow knew it. And if anybody had doubts, he feltguilty and kept his mouth shut—because they made it sound like anyone who'doppose the plan was a child killer at heart and less than a human being. Theytold us that this plan would achieve a noble ideal. Well, how were we to knowotherwise? Hadn't we heard it all our lives—from our parents and ourschoolteachers and our ministers, and in every newspaper we ever read andevery movie and every public speech? Hadn't we always been told that this wasrighteous and just? Well, maybe there's some excuse for what we did at thatmeeting. Still, we voted for the plan—and what we got, we had it coming tous. You know, ma'am, we are marked men, in a way, those of us who livedthrough the four years of that plan in the Twentieth Century factory. What isit that hell is supposed to be?

Evil—plain, naked, smirking evil, isn't it? Well, that's what we saw andhelped to make—and I think we're damned, every one of us, and maybe we'llnever be forgiven. . . .

"Do you know how it worked, that plan, and what it did to people?

Try pouring water into a tank where there's a pipe at the bottom drainingit out faster than you pour it, and each bucket you bring breaks that pipe aninch wider, and the harder you work the more is demanded of you, and youstand slinging buckets forty hours a week, then forty-eight, then fifty-six—for your neighbor's supper—for his wife's operation—for his child's measles—for his mother's wheel chair —for his uncle's shirt—for his nephew'sschooling—for the baby next door—for the baby to be born—for anyone anywherearound you—

it's theirs to receive, from diapers to dentures—and yours to work, fromsunup to sundown, month after month, year after year, with nothing to showfor it but your sweat, with nothing in sight for you but their pleasure, forthe whole of your life, without rest, without hope, without end. . . . Fromeach according to his ability, to each according to his need. . . .

"We're all one big family, they told us, we're all in this together.But you don't all stand working an acetylene torch ten hours a day-together, and you don't all get a bellyache—together. What's whose abilityand which of whose needs comes first? When it's all one pot, you can't letany man decide what his own needs are, can you? If you did, he might claimthat he needs a yacht—and if his feelings is all you have to go by, he mightprove it, too. Why not? If it's not right for me to own a car until I'veworked myself into a hospital ward, earning a car for every loafer and everynaked savage on earth—why can't he demand a yacht from me, too, if I stillhave the ability not to have collapsed? No? He can't? Then why can he demandthat I go without cream for my coffee until he's replastered his living room?

. . . Oh well . . . Well, anyway, it was decided that nobody had the right tojudge his own need or ability. We voted on it. Yes, ma'am, we voted on it ina public meeting twice a year. How else could it be done? Do you care tothink what would happen at such a meeting? It took us just one meeting todiscover that we had become beggars—rotten, whining, sniveling beggars, allof us, because no man could claim his pay as his rightful earning, he had norights and no earnings, his work didn't belong to him, it belonged to 'thefamily, ' and they owed him nothing in return, and the only claim he had onthem was his 'need'

—so he had to beg in public for relief from his needs, like any lousymoocher, listing all his troubles and miseries, down to his patched drawersand his wife's head colds, hoping that 'the family' would throw him the alms.He had to claim miseries, because it's miseries, not work, that had becomethe coin of the realm—so it turned into a contest among six thousandpanhandlers, each claiming that his need was worse than his brother's. Howelse could it be done? Do you care to guess what happened, what sort of menkept quiet, feeling shame, and what sort got away with the jackpot?

"But that wasn't all. There was something else that we discovered at thesame meeting. The factory's production had fallen by forty per cent, in thatfirst half-year, so it was decided that somebody hadn't delivered 'accordingto his ability' Who? How would you tell it? 'The family' voted on that, too.They voted which men were the best, and these men were sentenced to workovertime each night for the next six months. Overtime without pay—because youweren't paid by tune and you weren't paid by work, only by need.

"Do I have to tell you what happened after that—and into what sort ofcreatures we all started turning, we who had once been human?

We began to hide whatever ability we had, to slow down and watch likehawks that we never worked any faster or better than the next fellow. Whatelse could we do, when we knew that if we did our best for 'the family,' it'snot thanks or rewards that we'd get, but punishment? We knew that for everystinker who'd ruin a batch of motors and cost the company money—eitherthrough his sloppiness, because he didn't have to care, or through plainincompetence—it's we who'd have to pay with our nights and our Sundays. So wedid our best to be no good.

"There was one young boy who started out, full of fire for the nobleideal, a bright kid without any schooling, but with a wonderful head on hisshoulders. The first year, he figured out a work process that saved usthousands of man-hours. He gave it to 'the family,'

didn't ask anything for it, either, couldn't ask, but that was all rightwith him. It was for the ideal, he said. But when he found himself voted asone of our ablest and sentenced to night work, because we hadn't gottenenough from him, he shut his mouth and his brain. You can bet he didn't comeup with any ideas, the second year.

"What was it they'd always told us about the vicious competition of theprofit system, where men had to compete for who'd do a better job than hisfellows? Vicious, wasn't it? Well, they should have seen what it was likewhen we all had to compete with one another for who'd do the worst jobpossible. There's no surer way to destroy a man than to force him into a spotwhere he has to aim at not doing his best, where he has to struggle to do abad job, day after day. That will finish him quicker than drink or idlenessor pulling stick-ups for a living. But there was nothing else for us to doexcept to fake unfitness.

The one accusation we feared was to be suspected of ability. Ability waslike a mortgage on you that you could never pay off. And what was there towork for? You knew that your basic pittance would be given to you anyway,whether you worked or not—your 'housing and feeding allowance,' it wascalled—and above that pittance, you had no chance to get anything, no matter

how hard you tried. You couldn't count on buying a new suit of clothes nextyear—they might give you a 'clothing allowance' or they might not, accordingto whether nobody broke a leg, needed an operation or gave birth to morebabies. And if there wasn't enough money for new suits for everybody, thenyou couldn't get yours, either.

"There was one man who'd worked hard all his life, because he'd alwayswanted to send his son through college. Well, the boy graduated from highschool in the second year of the plan—but 'the family'

wouldn't give the father any 'allowance' for the college. They said hisson couldn't go to college, until we had enough to send everybody's sons tocollege—and that we first had to send everybody's children through highschool, and we didn't even have enough for that. The father died thefollowing year, in a knife fight with somebody in a saloon, a fight overnothing in particular—such fights were beginning to happen among us all thetime.

"Then there was an old guy, a widower with no family, who had one hobby:phonograph records. I guess that was all he ever got out of life. In the olddays, he used to skip meals just to buy himself some new recording ofclassical music. Well, they didn't give him any 'allowance' for records—'personal luxury,' they called it. But at that same meeting, Millie Bush,somebody's daughter, a mean, ugly little eight-year-old, was voted a pair ofgold braces for her buck teeth—

this was 'medical need, ' because the staff psychologist had said that thepoor girl would get an inferiority complex if her teeth weren't straightenedout. The old guy' who loved music, turned to drink, instead. He got so younever saw him fully conscious any more. But it seems like there was onetiling he couldn't forget. One night, he came staggering down the street, sawMillie Bush, swung his fist and knocked all her teeth out. Every one of them.

"Drink, of course, was what we all turned to, some more, some less.

Don't ask how we got the money for it. When all the decent pleasures areforbidden, there's always ways to get the rotten ones. You don't break intogrocery stores after dark and you don't pick your fellow's pockets to buyclassical symphonies or fishing tackle, but if it's to get stinking drunk andforget—you do. Fishing tackle? Hunting guns?

Snapshot cameras? Hobbies? There wasn't any 'amusement allowance'

for anybody. 'Amusement' was the first thing they dropped. Aren't youalways supposed to be ashamed to object when anybody asks you to give upanything, if it's something that gave you pleasure? Even our 'tobaccoallowance' was cut to where we got two packs of cigarettes a month—and this,they told us, was because the money had to go into the babies' milk fund.Babies was the only item of production that didn't fall, but rose and kept onrising—because people had nothing else to do, I guess, and because theydidn't have to care, the baby wasn't their burden, it was 'the family's.' Infact, the best chance you had of getting a raise and breathing easier for awhile was a 'baby allowance.' Either that, or a major disease.

"It didn't take us long to see how it all worked out. Any man who tried toplay straight, had to refuse himself everything. He lost his taste for anypleasure, he hated to smoke a nickel's worth of tobacco or chew a stick ofgum, worrying whether somebody had more need for that nickel. He felt ashamedof every mouthful of food he swallowed, wondering whose weary nights ofovertime had paid for it, knowing that his food was not his by right,miserably wishing to be cheated rather than to cheat, to be a sucker, but nota blood-sucker.

He wouldn't marry, he wouldn't help his folks back home, he wouldn't putan extra burden on 'the family.' Besides, if he still had some sort of senseof responsibility, he couldn't marry or bring children into the world, whenhe could plan nothing, promise nothing, count on nothing.

But the shiftless and the irresponsible had a field day of it. They bredbabies, they got girls into trouble, they dragged in every worthless relativethey had from all over the country, every unmarried pregnant sister, for anextra 'disability allowance,' they got more sicknesses than any doctor coulddisprove, they ruined their clothing, their furniture, their homes—what thehell, 'the family' was paying for it! They found more ways of getting in'need' than the rest of us could ever imagine —they developed a special skillfor it, which was the only ability they showed.

"God help us, ma'am! Do you see what we saw? We saw that we'd been given alaw to live by, a moral law, they called it, which punished those whoobserved it—for observing it. The more you tried to live up to it, the moreyou suffered; the more you cheated it, the bigger reward you got. Yourhonesty was like a tool left at the mercy of the next man's dishonesty. Thehonest ones paid, the dishonest collected.

The honest lost, the dishonest won. How long could men stay good underthis sort of a law of goodness? We were a pretty decent bunch of fellows whenwe started. There weren't many chiselers among us.

We knew our jobs and we were proud of it and we worked for the bestfactory in the country, where old man Starnes hired nothing but the pick ofthe country's labor. Within one year under the new plan, there wasn't anhonest man left among us. That was the evil, the sort of hell-horror evilthat preachers used to scare you with, but you never thought to see alive.Not that the plan encouraged a few bastards, but that it turned decent peopleinto bastards, and there was nothing else that it could do—and it was calleda moral ideal!

"What was it we were supposed to want to work for? For the love of ourbrothers? What brothers? For the bums, the loafers, the moochers we saw allaround us? And whether they were cheating or plain incompetent, whether theywere unwilling or unable—what difference did that make to us? If we were tiedfor life to the level of their unfitness, faked or real, how long could wecare to go on? We had no way of knowing their ability, we had no way ofcontrolling their needs—all we knew was that we were beasts of burdenstruggling blindly in some sort of place that was half-hospital, half-stockyards—a place geared to nothing but disability, disaster, disease—beastsput there for the relief of whatever whoever chose to say was whichever'sneed.

"Love of our brothers? That's when we learned to hate our brothers for thefirst time in our lives. We began to hate them for every meal they swallowed,for every small pleasure they enjoyed, for one man's new shirt, for another'swife's hat, for an outing with their family, for a paint job on their house-it was taken from us, it was paid for by our privations, our denials, ourhunger. We began to spy on one another, each hoping to catch the others lyingabout their needs, so as to cut their 'allowance' at the next meeting. Webegan to have stool pigeons who informed on people, who reported thatsomebody had bootlegged a turkey to his family on some Sunday—which he'd paidfor by gambling, most likely. We began to meddle into one another's lives. Weprovoked family quarrels, to get somebody's relatives thrown out. Any time wesaw a man starting to go steady with a girl, we made life miserable for him.We broke up many engagements.

We didn't want anyone to marry, we didn't want any more dependents tofeed.

"In the old days, we used to celebrate if somebody had a baby, we used tochip in and help him out with the hospital bills, if he happened to be hard-pressed for the moment. Now, if a baby was born, we didn't speak to theparents for weeks. Babies, to us, had become what locusts were to farmers. Inthe old days, we used to help a man if he had a bad illness in the family.Now—well, I'll tell you about just one case. It was the mother of a man who

had been with us for fifteen years. She was a kindly old lady, cheerful andwise, she knew us all by our first names and we all liked her—we used to likeher. One day, she slipped on the cellar stairs and fell and broke her hip. Weknew what that meant at her age. The staff doctor said that she'd have to besent to a hospital in town, for expensive treatments that would take a longtime. The old lady died the night before she was to leave for town. Theynever established the cause of death. No, I don't know whether she wasmurdered. Nobody said that. Nobody would talk about it at all. All I know isthat I—and that's what I can't forget!—I, too, had caught myself wishing thatshe would die. This—may God forgive us!—was the brotherhood, the security,the abundance that the plan was supposed to achieve for us!

"Was there any reason why this sort of horror would ever be preached byanybody? Was there anybody who got any profit from it? There was. The Starnesheirs. I hope you're not going to remind me that they'd sacrificed a fortuneand turned the factory over to us as a gift. We were fooled by that one, too.Yes, they gave up the factory. But profit, ma'am, depends on what it isyou're after. And what the Starnes heirs were after, no money on earth couldbuy.

Money is too clean and innocent for that.

"Eric Starnes, the youngest—he was a jellyfish that didn't have the gutsto be after anything in particular. He got himself voted as Director of ourPublic Relations Department, which didn't do anything, except that he had astaff for the not doing of anything, so he didn't have to bother stickingaround the office. The pay he got—well, I shouldn't call it 'pay, ' none of uswas 'paid'—the alms voted to him was fairly modest, about ten times what Igot, but that wasn't riches.

Eric didn't care for money—he wouldn't have known what to do with it. Hespent his time hanging around among us, showing how chummy he was anddemocratic. He wanted to be loved, it seems. The way he went about it was tokeep reminding us that he had given us the factory. We couldn't stand him.

"Gerald Starnes was our Director of Production. We never learned just whatthe size of his rake-off—his alms—had been. It would have taken a staff ofaccountants to figure that out, and a staff of engineers to trace the way itwas piped, directly or indirectly, into his office.

None of it was supposed to be for him—it was all for company expenses.Gerald had three cars, four secretaries, five telephones, and he used tothrow champagne and caviar parties that no tax-paying tycoon in the countrycould have afforded. He spent more money in one year than his father hadearned in profits in the last two years of his life. We saw a hundred-poundstack—a hundred pounds, we weighed them—of magazines in Gerald's office, fullof stories about our factory and our noble plan, with big pictures of GeraldStarnes, calling him a great social crusader. Gerald liked to come into theshops at night, dressed in his formal clothes, flashing diamond cuff linksthe size of a nickel and shaking cigar ashes all over. Any cheap show-offwho's got nothing to parade but his cash, is bad enough—except that he makesno bones about the cash being his, and you're free to gape at him or not, asyou wish, and mostly you don't. But when a bastard like Gerald Starnes putson an act and keeps spouting that he doesn't care for material wealth, thathe's only serving 'the family,' that all the lushness is not for himself, butfor our sake and for the common good, because it's necessary to keep up theprestige of the company and of the noble plan in the eyes of the public—thenthat's when you learn to hate the creature as you've never hated anythinghuman.

"But his sister Ivy was worse. She really did not care for materialwealth. The alms she got was no bigger than ours, and she went about inscuffed, flat-heeled shoes and shirtwaists—just to show how selfless she was.She was our Director of Distribution. She was the lady in charge of our

needs. She was the one who held us by the throat. Of course, distribution wassupposed to be decided by voting—by the voice of the people. But when thepeople are six thousand howling voices, trying to decide without yardstick,rhyme or reason, when there are no rules to the game and each can demandanything, but has a right to nothing, when everybody holds power overeverybody's life except his own—then it turns out, as it did, that the voiceof the people is Ivy Starnes. By the end of the second year, we dropped thepretense of the 'family meetings'—in the name of 'production efficiency andtime economy,' one meeting used to take ten days—and all the petitions ofneed were simply sent to Miss Starnes' office. No, not sent. They had to berecited to her in person by every petitioner.

Then she made up a distribution list, which she read to us for our vote ofapproval at a meeting that lasted three-quarters of an hour.

We voted approval. There was a ten-minute period on the agenda fordiscussion and objections. We made no objections. We knew better by thattime. Nobody can divide a factory's income among thousands of people, withoutsome sort of a gauge to measure people's value. Her gauge was bootlicking.Selfless? In her father's time, all of his money wouldn't have given him achance to speak to his lousiest wiper and get away with it, as she spoke toour best skilled workers and their wives. She had pale eyes that lookedfishy, cold and dead. And if you ever want to see pure evil, you should haveseen the way her eyes glinted when she watched some man who'd talked back toher once and who'd just heard his name on the list of those getting nothingabove basic pittance. And when you saw it, you saw the real motive of anyperson who's ever preached the slogan: 'From each according to his ability,to each according to his need,'

"This was the whole secret of it. At first, I kept wondering how it couldbe possible that the educated, the cultured, the famous men of the worldcould make a mistake of this size and preach, as righteousness, this sort ofabomination—when five minutes of thought should have told them what wouldhappen if somebody tried to practice what they preached. Now I know that theydidn't do it by any kind of mistake. Mistakes of this size are never madeinnocently.

If men fall for some vicious piece of insanity, when they have no way tomake it work and no possible reason to explain their choice—it's because theyhave a reason that they do not wish to tell. And we weren't so innocenteither, when we voted for that plan at the first meeting. We didn't do itjust because we believed that the drippy old guff they spewed was good. Wehad another reason, but the guff helped us to hide it from our neighbors andfrom ourselves. The guff gave us a chance to pass off as virtue somethingthat we'd be ashamed to admit otherwise. There wasn't a man voting for it whodidn't think that under a setup of this kind he'd muscle in on the profits ofthe men abler than himself. There wasn't a man rich and smart enough but thathe didn't think that somebody was richer and smarter, and this plan wouldgive him a share of his better's wealth and brain. But while he was thinkingthat he'd get unearned benefits from the men above, he forgot about the menbelow who'd get unearned benefits, too. He forgot about all his inferiorswho'd rush to drain him just as he hoped to drain his superiors. The workerwho liked the idea that his need entitled him to a limousine like his boss's,forgot that every bum and beggar on earth would come howling that their needentitled them to an icebox like his own. That was our real motive when wevoted—

that was the truth of it—but we didn't like to think it, so the less weliked it, the louder we yelled about our love for the common good.

"Well, we got what we asked for. By the time we saw what it was that we'dasked for, it was too late. We were trapped, with no place to go. The bestmen among us left the factory in the first week of the plan. We lost our best

engineers, superintendents, foremen and highest skilled workers. A man ofself-respect doesn't turn into a milch cow for anybody. Some able fellowstried to stick it out, but they couldn't take it for long. We kept losing ourmen, they kept escaping from the factory like from a pesthole—till we hadnothing left except the men of need, but none of the men of ability.

"And the few of us who were still any good, but stayed on, were only thosewho had been there too long. In the old days, nobody ever quit the TwentiethCentury—and, somehow, we couldn't make ourselves believe that it was gone.After a while, we couldn't quit, because no other employer would have us—forwhich I can't blame him.

Nobody would deal with us in any way, no respectable person or firm.

All the small shops, where we traded, started moving out of Starnesvillefast—till we had nothing left but saloons, gambling joints and crooks whosold us trash at gouging prices. The alms we got kept falling, but the costof our living went up. The list of the factory's needy kept stretching, butthe list of its customers shrank. There was less and less income to divideamong more and more people. In the old days, it used to be said that theTwentieth Century Motor trademark was as good as the karat mark on gold. Idon't know what it was that the Starnes heirs thought, if they thought atall, but I suppose that like all social planners and like savages, theythought that this trademark was a magic stamp which did the trick by somesort of voodoo power and that it would keep them rich, as it had kept theirfather. Well, when our customers began to see that we never delivered anorder on time and never put out a motor that didn't have something wrong withit—the magic stamp began to work the other way around: people wouldn't take amotor as a gift, if it was marked Twentieth Century, And it came to where ouronly customers were men who never paid and never meant to pay their bills.But Gerald Starnes, doped by his own publicity, got huffy and went around,with an air of moral superiority, demanding that businessmen place orderswith us, not because our motors were good, but because we needed the ordersso badly.

"By that time, a village half-wit could see what generations of professorshad pretended not to notice. What good would our need do to a power plantwhen its generators stopped because of our defective engines? What good wouldit do to a man caught on an operating table when the electric light went out?What good would it do to the passengers of a plane when its motor failed inmid-air?

And if they bought our product, not because of its merit, but because ofour need, would that be the good, the right, the moral thing to do for theowner of that power plant, the surgeon in that hospital, the maker of thatplane?

"Yet this was the moral law that the professors and leaders and thinkershad wanted to establish all over the earth. If this is what it did in asingle small town where we all knew one another, do you care to think what itwould do on a world scale? Do you care to imagine what it would be like, ifyou had to live and to work, when you're tied to all the disasters and allthe malingering of the globe? To work —and whenever any men failed anywhere,it's you who would have to make up for it. To work—with no chance to rise,with your meals and your clothes and your home and your pleasure depending onany swindle, any famine, any pestilence anywhere on earth. To work—

with no chance for an extra ration, till the Cambodians have been fed andthe Patagonians have been sent through college. To work—on a blank check heldby every creature born, by men whom you'll never see, whose needs you'llnever know, whose ability or laziness or sloppiness or fraud you have no wayto learn and no right to question —just to work and work and work—and leaveit up to the Ivys and the Geralds of the world to decide whose stomach will

consume the effort, the dreams and the days of your life. And this is themoral law to accept? This—a moral ideal?

"Well, we tried it—and we learned. Our agony took four years, from ourfirst meeting to our last, and it ended the only way it could end: inbankruptcy. At our last meeting, Ivy Starnes was the one who tried to brazenit out. She made a short, nasty, snippy little speech in which she said thatthe plan had failed because the rest of the country had not accepted it, thata single community could not succeed in the midst of a selfish, greedy world—and that the plan was a noble ideal, but human nature was not good enough forit. A young boy—the one who had been punished for giving us a useful idea inour first year—got up, as we all sat silent, and walked straight to IvyStarnes on the platform. He said nothing. He spat in her face. That was theend of the noble plan and of the Twentieth Century."

The man had spoken as if the burden of his years of silence had slippedsuddenly out of his grasp. She knew that this was his tribute to her: he hadshown no reaction to her kindness, he had seemed numbed to human value orhuman hope, but something within him had been reached and his response wasthis confession, this long, desperate cry of rebellion against injustice,held back for years, but breaking out in recognition of the first person hehad met in whose hearing an appeal for justice would not be hopeless. It wasas if the life he had been about to renounce were given back to him by thetwo essentials he needed: by his food and by the presence of a rationalbeing.

"But what about John Gait?" she asked.

"Oh . . ."he said, remembering. "Oh, yes . . ."

"You were going to tell me why people started asking that question."

"Yes . . ."He was looking off, as if at some sight which he had studiedfor years, but which remained unchanged and unsolved; his face had an odd,questioning look of terror.

"You were going to tell me who was the John Gait they mean—if there everwas such a person."

"I hope there wasn't, ma'am. I mean, I hope that it's just a coincidence,just a sentence that hasn't any meaning."

"You had something in mind. What?"

"It was ... it was something that happened at that first meeting at theTwentieth Century factory. Maybe that was the start of it, maybe not. I don'tknow . . . The meeting was held on a spring night, twelve years ago. The sixthousand of us were crowded on bleachers built way up to the rafters of theplant's largest hangar. We had just voted for the new plan and we were in anedgy sort of mood, making too much noise, cheering the people's victory,threatening some kind of unknown enemies and spoiling for a fight, likebullies with an uneasy conscience. There were white arclights beating down onus and we felt kind of touchy and raw, and we were an ugly, dangerous mob inthat moment. Gerald Starnes, who was chairman, kept hammering his gavel fororder, and we quieted down some, but not much, and you could see the wholeplace moving restlessly from side to side, like water in a pan that's beingrocked. 'This is a crucial moment in the history of mankind!' Gerald Starnesyelled through the noise. 'Remember that none of us may now leave this place,for each of us belongs to all the others by the moral law which we allaccept!' 'I don't,"

said one man and stood up. He was one of the young engineers. Nobody knewmuch about him. He'd always kept mostly by himself. When he stood up, wesuddenly turned dead-still. It was the way he held his head. He was tall andslim—and I remember thinking that any two of us could have broken his neckwithout trouble—but what we all felt was fear. He stood like a man who knewthat he was right. 'I will put an end to this, once and for all,' he said.His voice was clear and without any feeling. That was all he said and started

to walk out. He walked down the length of the place, in the white light, nothurrying and not noticing any of us. Nobody moved to stop him. Gerald Starnescried suddenly after him, 'How?' He turned and answered, 'I will stop themotor of the world. Then he walked out. We never saw him again.

We never heard what became of him. But years later, when we saw the lightsgoing out, one after another, in the great factories that had stood solidlike mountains for generations, when we saw the gates closing and theconveyor belts turning still, when we saw the roads growing empty and thestream of cars draining off, when it began to look as if some silent powerwere stopping the generators of the world and the world was crumblingquietly, like a body when its spirit is gone—then we began to wonder and toask questions about him. We began to ask it of one another, those of us whohad heard him say it.

We began to think that he had kept his word, that he, who had seen andknown the truth we refused to know, was the retribution we had called uponour heads, the avenger, the man of that justice which we had defied. We beganto think that he had damned us and there was no escape from his verdict andwe would never be able to get away from him—and this was the more terriblebecause he was not pursuing us, it was we who were suddenly looking for himand he had merely gone without a trace. We found no answer about himanywhere. We wondered by what sort of impossible power he could have donewhat he had promised to do. There was no answer to that. We began to think ofhim whenever we saw another collapse in the world, which nobody couldexplain, whenever we took another blow, whenever we lost another hope,whenever we felt caught in this dead, gray fog that's descending all over theearth. Perhaps people heard us crying that question and they did not knowwhat we meant, but they knew too well the feeling that made us cry it. They,too, felt that something had gone from the world. Perhaps this was why theybegan to say it, whenever they felt that there was no hope. I'd like to thinkthat I am wrong, that those words mean nothing, that there's no consciousintention and no avenger behind the ending of the human race. But when I hearthem repeating that question, I feel afraid. I think of the man who said thathe would stop the motor of the world. You see, his name was John Gait."

She awakened, because the sound of the wheels had changed. It was anirregular beat, with sudden screeches and short, sharp cracks, a sound likethe broken laughter of hysteria, with the fitful jerking of the car to matchit. She knew, before she glanced at her watch, that this was the track of theKansas Western and that the train had started on its long detour south fromKirby, Nebraska.

The train was half-empty; few people had ventured across the continent onthe first Comet since the tunnel disaster. She had given a bedroom to thetramp, and then had remained alone with his story.

She had wanted to think of it, of all the questions she intended to askhim tomorrow—but she had found her mind frozen and still, like a spectatorstaring at the story, unable to function, only to stare. She had felt as ifshe knew the meaning of that spectacle, knew it with no further questions andhad to escape it. To move—had been the words beating in her mind withpeculiar urgency—to move—as if movement had become an end in itself, crucial,absolute and doomed.

Through a thin layer of sleep, the sound of the wheels had kept running arace with the growth of her tension. She had kept awakening, as in acauseless start of panic, finding herself upright in the darkness, thinkingblankly: What was it?—then telling herself in reassurance: We're moving . . .we're still moving. . . .

The track of the Kansas Western was worse than she had expected—

she thought, listening to the wheels. The train was now carrying herhundreds of miles away from Utah. She had felt a desperate desire to get off

the train on the main line, abandon all the problems of TaggartTranscontinental, find an airplane and fly straight to Quentin Daniels.

It had taken a cheerless effort of will to remain in her car.

She lay in the darkness, listening to the wheels, thinking that onlyDaniels and his motor still remained like a point of fire ahead, pulling herforward. Of what use would the motor now be to her? She had no answer. Whydid she feel so certain of the desperate need to hurry?

She had no answer. To reach him in time, was the only ultimatum left inher mind. She held onto it, asking no questions. Wordlessly, she knew thereal answer: the motor was needed, not to move trains, but to keep hermoving.

She could not hear the beat of the fourth knocks any longer in the jumbledscreeching of metal, she could not hear the steps of the enemy she wasracing, only the hopeless stampede of panic. . . .

I'll get there in time, she thought, I'll get there first, I'll save themotor.

There's one motor he's not going to stop, she thought . . .he's not goingto stop . . .he's not going to stop . . .He's not going to stop, shethought—awakening with a jolt, jerking her head off the pillow. The wheelshad stopped.

For a moment, she remained still, trying to grasp the peculiar stillnessaround her. It felt like the impossible attempt to create a sensory image ofnon-existence. There were no attributes of reality to perceive, nothing buttheir absence: no sound, as if she were alone on the train—no motion, as ifthis were not a train, but a room in a building—no light, as if this wereneither train nor room, but space without objects—no sign of violence orphysical disaster, as if this were the state where disaster is no longerpossible.

In the moment when she grasped the nature of the stillness, her bodysprang upright with a single curve of motion, immediate and violent like acry of rebellion. The loud screech of the window shade went like a knife-cutthrough the silence, as she threw the shade upward. There was nothing outsidebut anonymous stretches of prairie; a strong wind was breaking the clouds,and a shaft of moonlight fell through, but it fell upon plains that seemed asdead as those from which it came.

The sweep of her hand pressed the light switch and the bell to summon theporter. The electric light came on and brought her back to a rational world.She glanced at her watch: it was a few minutes past midnight. She looked outof the rear window: the track went off in a straight line and, at theprescribed distance, she saw the red lanterns left on the ground, placedconscientiously to protect the rear of the train. The sight seemedreassuring.

She pressed the porter's bell once more. She waited. She went to thevestibule, unlocked the door and leaned out to look down the line of thetrain. A few windows were lighted in the long, tapering band of steel, butshe saw no figures, no sign of human activity. She slammed the door, cameback and started to dress, her movements suddenly calm and swift.

No one came to answer her bell. When she hastened across to the next car,she felt no fear, no uncertainty, no despair, nothing but the urgency ofaction.

There was no porter in the cubbyhole of the next car, no porter in the carbeyond. She hurried down the narrow passageways, meeting no one. But a fewcompartment doors were open. The passengers sat inside, dressed or half-dressed, silently, as if waiting. They watched her rush by with oddly furtiveglances, as if they knew what she was after, as if they had expected someoneto come and to face what they had not faced. She went on, running down thespinal cord of a dead train, noting the peculiar combination of lighted

compartments, open doors and empty passages: no one had ventured to step out.No one had wanted to ask the first question.

She ran through the train's only coach, where some passengers slept incontorted poses of exhaustion, while others, awake and still, sat hunched,like animals waiting for a blow, making no move to avert it In the vestibuleof the coach, she stopped. She saw a man, who had unlocked the door and wasleaning out, looking inquiringly ahead through the darkness, ready to stepoff. He turned at the sound of her approach. She recognized his face: it wasOwen Kellogg, the man who had rejected the future she had once offered him.

"Kellogg!" she gasped, the sound of laughter in her voice like a cry ofrelief at the sudden sight of a man in a desert.

"Hello, Miss Taggart, " he answered, with an astonished smile that held atouch of incredulous pleasure—and of wistfulness. "I didn't know you wereaboard."

"Come on," she ordered, as if he were still an employee of the railroad."I think we're on a frozen train."

"We are," he said, and followed her with prompt, disciplined obedience.

No explanations were necessary. It was as if, in unspoken understanding,they were answering a call to duty—and it seemed natural that of the hundredsaboard, it was the two of them who should be partners-in-danger.

"Any idea how long we've been standing?" she asked, as they hurried onthrough the next car.

"No," he said. "We were standing when I woke up."

They went the length of the train, finding no porters, no waiters in thediner, no brakemen, no conductor. They glanced at each other once in a while,but kept silent. They knew the stories of abandoned trai ns, of the crews thatvanished in sudden bursts of rebellion against serfdom.

They got off at the head end of the train, with no motion around them savethe wind on their faces, and they climbed swiftly aboard the engine. Theengine's headlight was on, stretching like an accusing arm into the void ofthe night. The engine's cab was empty.

Her cry of desperate triumph broke out in answer to the shock of thesight: "Good for them! They're human beings!"

She stopped, aghast, as at the cry of a stranger. She noticed that Kelloggstood watching her curiously, with the faint hint of a smile.

It was an old steam engine, the best that the railroad had been able toprovide for the Comet. The fire was banked in the grates, the steam gauge waslow, and in the great windshield before them the headlight fell upon a bandof ties that should have been running to meet them, but lay still instead,like a ladder's steps, counted, numbered and ended.

She reached for the logbook and looked at the names of the train's lastcrew. The engineer had been Pat Logan.

Her head dropped slowly, and she closed her eyes. She thought of the firstrun on a green-blue track, that must have been in Pat Logan's mind—as it wasnow in hers—through the silent hours of his last run on any rail.

"Miss Taggart?" said Owen Kellogg softly.

She jerked her head up. "Yes," she said, "yes . . . Well"—her voice had nocolor except the metallic tinge of decision—"we'11 have to get to a phone andcall for another crew." She glanced at her watch. "At the rate we wererunning, I think we must be about eighty miles from the Oklahoma state line.I believe Bradshaw is this road's nearest division point to call. We'resomewhere within thirty miles of it."

"Are there any Taggart trains following us?"

"The next one is Number 253, the transcontinental freight, but it won'tget here till about seven A.M., if it's running on time, which 1 doubt."

"Only one freight in seven hours?" He said it involuntarily, with a noteof outraged loyalty to the great railroad he had once been proud to serve.

Her mouth moved in the brief snap of a smile. "Our transcontinentaltraffic is not what it was in your day."

He nodded slowly. "I don't suppose there are any Kansas Western trainscoming tonight, either?"

"I can't remember offhand, but I think not."

He glanced at the poles by the side of the track. "I hope that the KansasWestern people have kept their phones in order."

"You mean that the chances are they haven't, if we judge by the state oftheir track. But we'll have to try it,"

"Yes."

She turned to go, but stopped. She knew it was useless to comment, but thewords came involuntarily. "You know," she said, "it's those lanterns our menput behind the train to protect us that's the hardest thing to take. They . .. they felt more concern for human lives than their country had shown fortheirs."

His swift glance at her was like a shot of deliberate emphasis, then heanswered gravely, "Yes, Miss Taggart."

Climbing down the ladder on the side of the engine, they saw a cluster ofpassengers gathered by the track and more figures emerging from the train tojoin them. By some special instinct of their own, the men who had sat waitingknew that someone had taken charge, someone had assumed the responsibilityand it was now safe to show signs of life.

They all looked at her with an air of inquiring expectation, as sheapproached. The unnatural pallor of the moonlight seemed to dissolve thedifferences of their faces and to stress the quality they all had in common:a look of cautious appraisal, part fear, part plea, part impertinence held inabeyance.

"Is there anyone here who wishes to be spokesman for the passengers?" sheasked.

They looked at one another. There was no answer.

"Very well," she said. "You don't have to speak. I'm Dagny Taggart, theOperating Vice-President of this railroad, and"—there was a rustle ofresponse from the group, half-movement, half-whisper, resembling relief—"andI'll do the speaking. We are on a train that has been abandoned by its crew.There was no physical accident. The engine is intact. But there is no one torun it. This is what the newspapers call a frozen train. You all know what itmeans—and you know the reasons. Perhaps you knew the reasons long before theywere discovered by the men who deserted you tonight. The law forbade them todesert. But this will not help you now."

A woman shrieked suddenly, with the demanding petulance of hysteria, "Whatare we going to do?"

Dagny paused to look at her. The woman was pushing forward, to squeezeherself into the group, to place some human bodies between herself and thesight of the great vacuum—the plain stretching off and dissolving intomoonlight, the dead phosphorescence of impotent, borrowed energy. The womanhad a coat thrown over a nightgown; the coat was slipping open and herstomach protruded under the gown's thin cloth, with that loose obscenity ofmanner which assumes all human self-revelation to be ugliness and makes noeffort to conceal it. For a moment, Dagny regretted the necessity tocontinue.

"I shall go down the track to a telephone, " she continued, her voice clearand as cold as the moonlight. "There are emergency telephones at intervals offive miles along the right-of-way. I shall call for another crew to be senthere. This will take some time. You will please stay aboard and maintain suchorder as you are capable of maintaining."

"What about the gangs of raiders?" asked another woman's nervous voice.

"That's true," said Dagny. "I'd better have someone to accompany me. Whowishes to go?"

She had misunderstood the woman's motive. There was no answer.

There were no glances directed at her or at one another. There were noeyes—only moist ovals glistening in the moonlight. There they were, shethought, the men of the new age, the demanders and recipients of self-sacrifice. She was struck by a quality of anger in their silence—

an anger saying that she was supposed to spare them moments such as this—and, with a feeling of cruelty new to her, she remained silent by consciousintention.

She noticed that Owen Kellogg, too, was waiting; but he was not watchingthe passengers, he was watching her face. When he became certain that therewould be no answer from the crowd, he said quietly, "I'll go with you, ofcourse, Miss Taggart."

"Thank you."

"What about us?" snapped the nervous woman.

Dagny turned to her, answering in the formal, inflectionless monotone ofbusiness executive, "There have been no cases of raider gang attacks uponfrozen trains—unfortunately."

"Just where are we?" asked a bulky man with too expensive an overcoat andtoo flabby a face; his voice had a tone intended for servants by a man unfitto employ them. "In what part of what state?"

"I don't know," she answered.

"How long will we be kept here?" asked another, in the tone of a creditorwho is imposed upon by a debtor."1 don't know."

"When will we get to San Francisco?" asked a third, in the manner of asheriff addressing a suspect."I don't know."

The demanding resentment was breaking loose, in small, crackling puffs,like chestnuts popping open in the dark oven of the minds who now feltcertain that they were taken care of and safe.

"This is perfectly outrageous!" yelled a woman, springing forward,throwing her words at Dagny's face. "You have no right to let this happen! Idon't intend to be kept waiting in the middle of nowhere!

I expect transportation!"

"Keep your mouth shut," said Dagny, "or I'll lock the train doors andleave you where you are."

"You can't do that! You're a common carrier! You have no right todiscriminate against me! I'll report it to the Unification Board!"

"—if I give you a train to get you within sight or hearing of your Board,said Dagny, turning away.

She saw Kellogg looking at her, his glance like a line drawn under herwords, underscoring them for her own attention.

"Get a flashlight somewhere," she said, "while I go to get my handbag,then we'll start."

When they started out on their way to the track phone, walking past thesilent line of cars, they saw another figure descending from the train andhurrying to meet them. She recognized the tramp.

"Trouble, ma'am?" he asked, stopping.

"The crew has deserted."

"Oh. What's to be done?"

"I'm going to a phone to call the division point."

"You can't go alone, ma'am. Not these days. I'd better go with you."She smiled. "Thanks. But I'll be all right. Mr. Kellogg here is going witme. Say—what's your name?""Jeff Alien, ma'am."

"Listen, Alien, have you ever worked for a railroad?""No, ma'am."

"Well, you're working for one now. You're deputy-conductor and proxy-vice-president-in-charge-of-operation. Your job is to take charge of this train inmy absence, to preserve order and to keep the cattle from stampeding. Tellthem that I appointed you. You don't need any proof. They'll obey anybody whoexpects obedience."

"Yes, ma'am," he answered firmly, with a look of understanding.

She remembered that money inside a man's pocket had the power to turn intoconfidence inside his mind; she took a hundred-dollar bill from her bag andslipped it into his hand. "As advance on wages,"

she said.

"Yes, ma'am."

She had started off, when he called after her, "Miss Taggart!"She turned. "Yes?""Thank you," he said.

She smiled, half-raising her hand in a parting salute, and walked on.

"Who is that?" asked Kellogg.

"A tramp who was caught stealing a ride."

"He'll do the job, I think."

"He will."

They walked silently past the engine and on in the direction of itsheadlight. At first, stepping from tie to tie, with the violent light beatingagainst them from behind, they still felt as if they were at home in thenormal realm of a railroad. Then she found herself watching the light on theties under her feet, watching it ebb slowly, trying to hold it, to keepseeing its fading glow, until she knew that the hint of a glow on the woodwas no longer anything but moonlight. She could not prevent the shudder thatmade her turn to look back. The headlight still hung behind them, like theliquid silver globe of a planet, deceptively close, but belonging to anotherorbit and another system.

Owen Kellogg walked silently beside her, and she felt certain that theyknew each other's thoughts.

"He couldn't have. Oh God, he couldn't!" she said suddenly, not realizingthat she had switched to words.

"Who?"

"Nathaniel Taggart. He couldn't have worked with people like thosepassengers. He couldn't have run trains for them. He couldn't have employedthem. He couldn't have used them at all, neither as customers nor asworkers."

Kellogg smiled. "You mean that he couldn't have grown rich by exploitingthem, Miss Taggart?"

She nodded. "They . . ." she said, and he heard the faint trembling of hervoice, which was love and pain and indignation, "they've said for years thathe rose by thwarting the ability of others, by leaving them no chance, andthat . . . that human incompetence was to his selfish interest. . . . But he. . . it wasn't obedience that he required of people."

"Miss Taggart," he said, with an odd note of sternness in his voice, "justremember that he represented a code of existence which—for a brief span inall human history—drove slavery out of the civilized world. Remember it, whenyou feel baffled by the nature of his enemies,"

"Have you ever heard of a woman named Ivy Starnes?"

"Oh yes."

"I keep thinking that this was what she would have enjoyed—the spectacleof those passengers tonight. This was what she's after. But we—we can't livewith it, you and I, can we? No one can live with it.

It's not possible to live with it."

"What makes you think that Ivy Starnes's purpose is life?"

Somewhere on the edge of her mind—like the wisps she saw floating on theedges of the prairie, neither quite rays nor fog nor cloud-she felt some shape which she could not grasp, half-suggested anddemanding to be grasped.

She did not speak, and—like the links of a chain unrolling through theirsilence—the rhythm of their steps went on, spaced to the ties, scored by thedry, swift beat of heels on wood.

She had not had time to be aware of him, except as of a providentialcomrade-in-competence; now she glanced at him with conscious attention. Hisface had the clear, hard look she remembered having liked in the past. Butthe face had grown calmer, as if more serenely at peace. His clothes werethreadbare. He wore an old leather jacket, and even in the darkness she coulddistinguish the scuffed blotches streaking across the leather.

"What have you been doing since you left Taggart Transcontinental?" sheasked.

"Oh, many things."

"Where are you working now?"

"On special assignments, more or less."

"Of what kind?"

"Of every kind."

"You're not working for a railroad?""No. "

The sharp brevity of the sound seemed to expand it into an eloquentstatement. She knew that he knew her motive. "Kellogg, if I told you that Idon't have a single first-rate man left on the Taggart system, if I offeredyou any job, any terms, any money you cared to name—would you come back tous?"

"No. "

"You were shocked by our loss of traffic. I don't think you have any ideaof what our loss of men has done to us. I can't tell you the sort of agony Iwent through three days ago, trying to find somebody able to build five milesof temporary track. I have fifty miles to build through the Rockies. I see noway to do it. But it has to be done. I've combed the country for men. Therearen't any. And then to run into you suddenly, to find you here, in a daycoach, when I'd give half the system for one employee like you—do youunderstand why I can't let you go? Choose anything you wish. Want to begeneral manager of a region? Or assistant operating vice-president?"

"No. "

"You're still working for a living, aren't you?""Yes."

"You don't seem to be making very much.""I'm making enough for my needs—and for nobody else's.""Why are you willing to work for anyone but Taggart Transcontinental?""Because you wouldn't give me the kind of job I'd want.""I?" She stopped still. "Good God, Kellogg!—haven't you understood? I'dgive you any job you name!""All right. Track walker.""What?"

"Section hand. Engine wiper." He smiled at the look on her face.

"No? You see, I said you wouldn't."

"Do you mean that you'd take a day laborer's job?"

"Any time you offered it."

"But nothing better?"

"That's right, nothing better."

"Don't you understand that I have too many men who're able to do thosejobs, but nothing better?"

"I understand it, Miss Taggart. Do you?""What I need is your—"

"—mind, Miss Taggart? My mind is not on the market any longer."She stood looking at him, her face growing harder. "You're one of them,aren't you?" she said at last."Of whom?"

She did not answer, shrugged and went on, "Miss Taggart," he asked, "howlong will you remain willing to be a common carrier?"

"I won't surrender the world to the creature you're quoting.""The answer you gave her was much more realistic."

The chain of their steps had stretched through many silent minutes beforeshe asked, "Why did you stand by me tonight? Why were you willing to helpme?"

He answered easily, almost gaily, "Because there isn't a passenger on thattrain who needs to get where he's going more urgently than I do. If the traincan be started, none will profit more than I. But when I need something, Idon't sit and expect transportation, like that creature of yours."

"You don't? And what if all trains stopped running?"

"Then I wouldn't count on making a crucial journey by train."

"Where are you going?"

"West. "

"On a 'special assignment'?"

"No. For a month's vacation with some friends.""A vacation? And it's that important to you?""More important than anything on earth."

They had walked two miles when they came to the small gray box on a postby the trackside, which was the emergency telephone.

The box hung sidewise, beaten by storms. She jerked it open. The telephonewas there, a familiar, reassuring object, glinting in the beam of Kellogg'sflashlight. But she knew, the moment she pressed the receiver to her ear, andhe knew, when he saw her finger tapping sharply against the hook, that thetelephone was dead.

She handed the receiver to him without a word. She held the flashlight,while he went swiftly over the instrument, then tore it off the wall andstudied the wires.

"The wire's okay," he said. "The current's on. It's this particularinstrument that's out of order. There's a chance that the next one might beworking." He added, "The next one is five miles away."

"Let's go," she said.

Far behind them, the engine's headlight was still visible, not a planetany longer, but a small star winking, through mists of distance.

Ahead of them, the rail went off into bluish space, with nothing to markits end.

She realized how often she had glanced back at that headlight; so long asit remained in sight, she had felt as if a life-line were holding themanchored safely; now they had to break it and dive into . . .

and dive off this planet, she thought. She noticed that Kellogg, too,stood looking back at the headlight.

They glanced at each other, but said nothing. The crunch of a pebble underher shoe sole burst like a firecracker in the silence.

With a coldly intentional movement, he kicked the telephone instrument andsent it rolling into a ditch: the violence of the noise shattered the vacuum.

"God damn him," he said evenly, not raising his voice, with a loathingpast any display of emotion. "He probably didn't feel like attending to hisjob, and since he needed his pay check, nobody had the right to ask that hekeep the phones in order."

"Come on," she said.

"We can rest, if you feel tired, Miss Taggart.""I'm all right. We have no time to feel tired."

"That's our great error, Miss Taggart. We ought to take the time, someday. "

She gave a brief chuckle, she stepped onto a tie of the track, stressingthe step as her answer, and they went on.

It was hard, walking on ties, but when they tried to walk along thetrackside, they found that it was harder. The soil, half-sand, half-dust,sank under their heels, like the soft, unresisting spread of some substancethat was neither liquid nor solid. They went back to walking from tie to tie;it was almost like stepping from log to log in the midst of a river.

She thought of what an enormous distance five miles had suddenly become,and that a division point thirty miles away was now unattainable—after an eraof railroads built by men who thought in thousands of transcontinental miles.That net of rails and lights, spreading from ocean to ocean, hung on the snapof a wire, on a broken connection inside a rusty phone—no, she thought, onsomething much more powerful and much more delicate. It hung on theconnections in the minds of the men who knew that the existence of a wire, ofa train, of a job, of themselves and their actions was an absolute not to beescaped. When such minds were gone, a two thousand-ton train was left at themercy of the muscles of her legs.

Tired?—she thought; even the strain of walking was a value, a small pieceof reality in the stillness around them. The sensation of effort was aspecific experience, it was pain and could be nothing else—in the midst of aspace which was neither light nor dark, a soil which neither gave norresisted, a fog which neither moved nor hung still. Their strain was the onlyevidence of their motion: nothing changed in the emptiness around them,nothing took form to mark their progress. She had always wondered, inincredulous contempt, about the sects that preached the annihilation of theuniverse as the ideal to be attained. There, she thought, was their world andthe content of their minds made real.

When the green light of a signal appeared by the track, it gave them apoint to reach and pass, but—incongruous in the midst of the floatingdissolution—it brought them no sense of relief. It seemed to come from a longsince extinguished world, like those stars whose light remains after they aregone. The green circle glowed in space, announcing a clear track, invitingmotion where there was nothing to move. Who was that philosopher, shethought, who preached that motion exists without any moving entities? Thiswas his world, too.

T!

She found herself pushing forward with increasing effort, as if againstsome resistance that was, not pressure, but suction. Glancing at Kellogg, shesaw that he, too, was walking like a man braced against a storm. She felt asif the two of them were the sole survivors of ... of reality, she thought-two lonely figures fighting, not through a storm, but worse: through non-existence .

It was Kellogg who glanced back, after a while, and she followed hisglance: there was no headlight behind them.

They did not stop. Looking straight ahead, he reached absently into hispocket; she felt certain that the movement was involuntary; he produced apackage of cigarettes and extended it to her.

She was about to take a cigarette—then, suddenly, she seized his wrist andtore the package out of his hand. It was a plain white package that bore, assingle imprint, the sign of the dollar.

"Give me the flashlight!" she ordered, stopping.

He stopped obediently and sent the beam of the flashlight at the packagein her hands. She caught a glimpse of his face: he looked a little astonishedand very amused.

There was no printing on the package, no trade name, no address, only thedollar sign stamped in gold. The cigarettes bore the same sign."Where did you get this?" she asked.

He was smiling. "If you know enough to ask that, Miss Taggart, you shouldknow that I won't answer."

"I know that this stands for something."

"The dollar sign? For a great deal. It stands on the vest of every fat,pig like figure in every cartoon, for the purpose of denoting a crook, agrafter, a scoundrel—as the one sure-fire brand of evil. It stands—as themoney of a free country—for achievement, for success, for ability, for man'screative power—and, precisely for these reasons, it is used as a brand ofinfamy. It stands stamped on the forehead of a man like Hank Rearden, as amark of damnation. Incidentally, do you know where that sign comes from? Itstands for the initials of the United States."

He snapped the flashlight off, but he did not move to go; she coulddistinguish the hint of his bitter smile.

"Do you know that the United States is the only country in history thathas ever used its own monogram as a symbol of depravity? Ask yourself why.Ask yourself how long a country that did that could hope to exist, and whosemoral standards have destroyed it. It was the only country in history wherewealth was not acquired by looting, but by production, not by force, but bytrade, the only country whose money was the symbol of man's right to his ownmind, to his work, to his life, to his happiness, to himself. If this isevil, by the present standards of the world, if this is the reason fordamning us, then we —we, the dollar chasers and makers—accept it and chooseto be damned by that world. We choose to wear the sign of the dollar on ourforeheads, proudly, as our badge of nobility—the badge we are willing to livefor and, if need be, to die."

He extended his hand for the package. She held it as if her fingers wouldnot let it go, but gave up and placed it on his palm. With deliberateslowness, as if to underscore the meaning of his gesture, he offered her acigarette. She took it and placed it between her lips.

He took one for himself, struck a match, lighted both, and they walked on.

They walked, over rotting logs that sank without resistance into theshifting ground, through a vast, uncongealed globe of moonlight and coilingmist—with two spots of living fire in their hands and the glow of two smallcircles to light their faces.

"Fire, a dangerous force, tamed at his fingertips . . ." she rememberedthe old man saying to her, the old man who had said that these cigaretteswere not made anywhere on earth. "When a man thinks, there is a spot of firealive in his mind—and it's proper that he should have the burning point of acigarette as his one expression."

"I wish you'd tell me who makes them," she said, in the tone of a hopelessplea.

He chuckled good-naturedly. "I can tell you this much: they're made by afriend of mine, for sale, but—not being a common carrier —he sells them onlyto his friends."

"Sell me that package, will you?"

"I don't think you'll be able to afford it, Miss Taggart, but—all right,if you wish."

"How much is it?""Five cents."

"Five cents?" she repeated, bewildered."Five cents—" he said, and added, "in gold."

She stopped, staring at him. "In gold?""Yes, Miss Taggart."

"Well, what's your rate of exchange? How much is it in our normal money?"

"There is no rate of exchange, Miss Taggart. No amount of physical—orspiritual—currency, whose sole standard of value is the decree of Mr. WesleyMouch, will buy these cigarettes."

"I see."

He reached into his pocket, took out the package and handed it to her."I'll give them to you, Miss Taggart," he said, "because you've earned themmany times over—and because you need them for the same purpose we do."

"What purpose?"

"To remind us—in moments of discouragement, in the loneliness of exile—ofour true homeland, which has always been yours, too, Miss Taggart."

'Thank you," she said. She put the cigarettes in her pocket; he saw thather hand was trembling.

When they reached the fourth of the five mileposts, they had been silentfor a long time, with no strength left for anything but the effort of movingtheir feet. Far ahead, they saw a dot of light, too low on the horizon andtoo harshly clear to be a star. They kept watching it, as they walked, andsaid nothing until they became certain that it was a powerful electric beaconblazing in the midst of the empty prairie.

"What is that?" she asked.

"I don't know," he said. "It looks like-"

"No," she broke in hastily, "it couldn't be. Not around here."

She did not want to hear him name the hope which she had felt for manyminutes past. She could not permit herself to think of it or to know that thethought was hope.

They found the telephone box at the fifth milepost. The beacon hung like aviolent spot of cold fire, less than half a mile farther south.

The telephone was working. She heard the buzz of the wire, like the breathof a living creature, when she lifted the receiver. Then a drawling voiceanswered, "Jessup, at Bradshaw." The voice sounded sleepy.

"This is Dagny Taggart, speaking from—"

"Who?"

"Dagny Taggart, of Taggart Transcontinental, speaking—""Oh ... Oh yes ... I see . . . Yes?"

"—speaking from your track phone Number 83. The Comet is stalled sevenmiles north of here. It's been abandoned. The crew has deserted."

There was a pause. "Well, what do you want me to do about it?"

She had to pause in turn, in order to believe it. "Are you the nightdispatcher?"

"Yeah."

"Then send another crew out to us at once."

"A full passenger train crew?"

"Of course."

"Now?"

"Yes."

There was a pause. "The rules don't say anything about that."

"Get me the chief dispatcher," she said, choking.

"He's away on his vacation."

"Get the division superintendent."

"He's gone down to Laurel for a couple of days."

"Get me somebody who's in charge."

"I'm in charge."

"Listen," she said slowly, fighting for patience, "do you understand thatthere's a train, a passenger limited, abandoned in the middle of theprairie?"

"Yeah, but how am I to know what I'm supposed to do about it?

The rules don't provide for it. Now if you had an accident, we'd send outthe wrecker, but if there was no accident . . . you don't need the wrecker,do you?"

"No. We don't need the wrecker. We need men. Do you understand? Living mento run an engine."

"The rules don't say anything about a train without men. Or about menwithout a train. There's no rule for calling out a full crew in the middle ofthe night and sending them to hunt for a train somewhere.

I've never heard of it before,"

"You're hearing it now. Don't you know what you have to do?""Who am I to know?"

"Do you know that your job is to keep trains moving?"

"My job is to obey the rules. If I send out a crew when I'm not supposedto, God only knows what's going to happen! What with the Unification Boardand all the regulations they've got nowadays, who am I to take it uponmyself?"

"And what's going to happen if you leave a train stalled on the line?""That's not my fault. I had nothing to do with it. They can't blame me. Icouldn't help it."

"You're to help it now.""Nobody told me to.""I'm telling you to!"

"How do I know whether you're supposed to tell me or not? We're notsupposed to furnish any Taggart crews. You people were to run with your owncrews. That's what we were told."

"But this is an emergency!"

"Nobody told me anything about an emergency."

She had to take a few seconds to control herself. She saw Kellogg watchingher with a bitter smile of amusement.

"Listen," she said into the phone, "do you know that the Comet was due atBradshaw over three hours ago?"

"Oh, sure. But nobody's going to make any trouble about that. No train'sever on schedule these days,"

"Then do you intend to leave us blocking your track forever?"

"We've got nothing due till Number 4, the northbound passenger out ofLaurel, at eight thirty-seven A.M. You can wait till then. The day-trickdispatcher will be on then. You can speak to him,"

"You blasted idiot! This is the Comet!"

"What's that to me? This isn't Taggart Transcontinental. You people expecta lot for your money. You've been nothing but a headache to us7 with all theextra work at no extra pay for the little fellows."

His voice was slipping into whining insolence. "You can't talk to me thatway. The time's past when you could talk to people that way."

She had never believed that there were men with whom a certain method,which she had never used, would work; such men were not hired by TaggartTranscontinental and she had never been forced to deal with them before.

"Do you know who I am?" she asked, in the cold, overbearing tone of apersonal threat.

It worked. "I ... I guess so," he answered.

"Then let me tell you that if you don't send a crew to me at once, you'llbe out of a job within one hour after I reach Bradshaw, which I'll reachsooner or later. You'd better make it sooner."

"Yes, ma'am," he said.

"Call out a full passenger train crew and give them orders to run us toLaurel, where we have our own men."

"Yes, ma'am." He added, "Will you tell headquarters that it was you whotold me to do it?""I will."

"And that it's you who're responsible for it?""I am."

There was a pause, then he asked helplessly, "Now how am I going to callthe men? Most of them haven't got any phones.""Do you have a call boy?"

"Yes, but he won't get here till morning.""Is there anybody in the yards right now?""There's the wiper in the roundhouse.""Send him out to call the men.""Yes, ma'am. Hold the line."

She leaned against the side of the phone box, to wait. Kellogg wassmiling.

"And you propose to run a railroad—a transcontinental railroad—with that?" he asked.She shrugged.

She could not keep her eyes off the beacon. It seemed so close, so easilywithin her reach. She felt as if the unconfessed thought were strugglingfuriously against her, splattering bits of the struggle all over her mind: Aman able to harness an untapped source of energy, a man working on a motor tomake all other motors useless . . . she could be talking to him, to his kindof brain, in a few hours ... in just a few hours. . . . What if there wasno need to hurry to him? It was what she wanted to do. It was all she wanted.. . . Her work?

What was her work: to move on to the fullest, most exacting use of hermind—or to spend the rest of her life doing his thinking for a man unfit tobe a night dispatcher? Why had she chosen to work?

Was it in order to remain where she had started—night operator of RockdaleStation—no, lower than that—she had been better than that dispatcher, even atRockdale—was this to be the final sum: an end lower than her beginning? . . .There was no reason to hurry? She was the reason. . . . They needed thetrains, but they did not need the motor? She needed the motor. . . . Herduty? To whom?

The dispatcher was gone for a long time; when he came back, his voicesounded sulky: "Well, the wiper says he can get the men all right, but it'sno use, because how am I going to send them out to you? We have no engine."

"No engine?"

"No. The superintendent took one to run down to Laurel, and the other's inthe shops, been there for weeks, and the switch engine jumped a rail thismorning, they'll be working on her till tomorrow afternoon."

"What about the wrecker's engine that you were offering to send us?"

"Oh, she's up north. They had a wreck there yesterday. She hasn't comeback yet."

"Have you a Diesel car?"

"Never had any such thing. Not around here.""Have you a track motor car?""Yes. We have that."

"Send them out on the track motor car.""Oh . . . Yes, ma'am."

"Tell your men to stop here, at track phone Number 83, to pick up Mr.Kellogg and myself." She was looking at the beacon, "Yes, ma'am."

"Call the Taggart trainmaster at Laurel, report the Comet's delay andexplain to him what happened." She put her hand into her pocket and suddenlyclutched her fingers: she felt the package of cigarettes. "Say—" she asked,"what's that beacon, about half a mile from here?"

"From where you are? Oh, that must be the emergency landing field of theFlagship Airlines."

"I see . . . Well, that's all. Get your men started at once. Tell them topick up Mr. Kellogg by track phone Number 83."

"Yes, ma'am."

She hung up. Kellogg was grinning."An airfield, isn't it?" he asked.

"Yes." She stood looking at the beacon, her hand still clutching thecigarettes in her pocket.

"So they're going to pick up Mr. Kellogg, are they?"

She whirled to him, realizing what decision her mind had been reachingwithout her conscious knowledge. "No," she said, "no, I didn't mean toabandon you here. It's only that I, too, have a crucial purpose out West,where I ought to hurry, so I was thinking of trying to catch a plane, but Ican't do it and it's not necessary."

"Come on," he said, starting in the direction of the airfield.

"But I-"

"If there's anything you want to do more urgently than to nurse thosemorons—go right ahead."

"More urgently than anything in the world," she whispered.

"I'll undertake to remain in charge for you and to deliver the Comet toyour man at Laurel."

"Thank you . . . But if you're hoping . . .I'm not deserting, you know."

"I know."

"Then why are you so eager to help me?"

"I just want you to see what it's like to do something you want, foronce."

"There's not much chance that they'll have a plane at that field.""There's a good chance that they will."

There were two planes on the edge of the airfield: one, the half charredremnant of a wreck, not worth salvaging for scrap—the other, a Dwight Sandersmonoplane, brand-new, the kind of ship that men were pleading for, in vain,all over the country.

There was one sleepy attendant at the airfield, young, pudgy and, but fora faint smell of college about his vocabulary, a brain brother of the nightdispatcher of Bradshaw. He knew nothing about the two planes: they had beenthere when he first took this job a year ago. He had never inquired aboutthem and neither had anybody else. In whatever silent crumbling had gone onat the distant headquarters, in the slow dissolution of a great airlinecompany, the Sanders monoplane had been forgotten—as assets of this naturewere being forgotten everywhere ... as the model of the motor had beenforgotten on a junk pile and, left in plain sight, had conveyed nothing tothe inheritors and the takers-over. . . .

There were no rules to tell the young attendant whether he was expected tokeep the Sanders plane or not. The decision was made for him by the brusque,confident manner of the two strangers—by the credentials of Miss DagnyTaggart, Vice-President of a railroad-by brief hints about a secret, emergency mission, which sounded likeWashington to him—by the mention of an agreement with the airline's topofficials in New York, whose names he had never heard before—by a check forfifteen thousand dollars, written by Miss Taggart, as deposit against thereturn of the Sanders plane—and by another check, for two hundred bucks, forhis own, personal courtesy.

He fueled the plane, he checked it as best he could, he found a map of thecountry's airports—and she saw that a landing field on the outskirts ofAfton, Utah, was marked as still in existence. She had been too tensely,swiftly active to feel anything, but at the last moment, when the attendant

switched on the floodlights, when she was about to climb aboard, she pausedto glance at the emptiness of the sky, then at Owen Kellogg. He stood, alonein the white glare, his feet planted firmly apart, on an island of cement ina ring of blinding lights, with nothing beyond the ring but an irredeemablenight—and she wondered which one of them was taking the greater chance andfacing the more desolate emptiness, "In case anything happens to me," shesaid, "will you tell Eddie Willers in my office to give Jeff Alien a job, asI promised?"

"I will. ... Is this all you wish to be done ... in case anythinghappens ?"

She considered it and smiled sadly, in astonishment at the realization."Yes, I guess that's all . . . Except, tell Hank Rearden what happened andthat I asked you to tell him."

"I will."

She lifted her head and said firmly, "I don't expect it to happen,however. When you reach Laurel, call Winston, Colorado, and tell them that Iwill be there tomorrow by noon."

"Yes, Miss Taggart."

She wanted to extend her hand in parting, but it seemed inadequate, andthen she remembered what he had said about times of loneliness. She took outthe package and silently offered him one of his own cigarettes. His smile wasa full statement of understanding, and the small flame of his match lightingtheir two cigarettes was their most enduring handshake.

Then she climbed aboard—and the next span of her consciousness was notseparate moments and movements, but the sweep of a single motion and a singleunit of time, a progression forming one entity, like the notes of a piece ofmusic: from the touch of her hand on the starter—to the blast of the motor'ssound that broke off, like a mountain rockslide, all contact with the timebehind her—to the circling fall of a blade that vanished in a fragile sparkleof whirling air that cut the space ahead—to the start for the runway—to thebrief pause—then to the forward thrust—to the long, perilous run, the run notto be obstructed, the straight line ran that gathers power by spending it ona harder and harder and ever-accelerating effort, the straight line to apurpose—to the moment, unnoticed., when the earth drops off and the line,unbroken, goes on into space in the simple, natural act of rising.

She saw the telegraph wires of the trackside slipping past at the tip ofher toes. The earth was falling downward, and she felt as if its weight weredropping off her ankles, as if the globe would go shrinking to the size of aball, a convict's ball she had dragged and lost.

Her body swayed, drunk with the shock of a discovery, and her craft rockedwith her body, and it was the earth below that reeled with the rocking of hercraft—the discovery that her life was now in her own hands, that there was nonecessity to argue, to explain, to teach, to plead, to fight—nothing but tosee and think and act. Then the earth steadied into a wide black sheet thatgrew wider and wider as she circled, rising. When she glanced down for thelast time, the lights of the field were extinguished, there was only thesingle beacon left and it looked like the tip of Kellogg's cigarette, glowingas a last salute in the darkness.

Then she was left with the lights on her instrument panel and the spreadof stars beyond her film of glass. There was nothing to support her but thebeat of the engine and the minds of the men who had made the plane. But whatelse supports one anywhere?—she thought.

The line of her course went northwest, to cut a diagonal across the stateof Colorado. She knew she had chosen the most dangerous route, over too longa stretch of the worst mountain barrier—but it was the shortest line, andsafety lay in altitude, and no mountains seemed dangerous compared to thedispatcher of Bradshaw.

The stars were like foam and the sky seemed full of flowing motion, themotion of bubbles settling and forming, the floating of circular waveswithout progression. A spark of light flared up on earth once in a while, andit seemed brighter than all the static blue above. But it hung alone, betweenthe black of ashes and the blue of a crypt, it seemed to fight for itsfragile foothold, it greeted her and went.

The pale streak of a river came rising slowly from the void, and for along stretch of time it remained in sight, gliding imperceptibly to meet her.It looked like a phosphorescent vein showing through the skin of the earth, adelicate vein without blood.

When she saw the lights of a town, like a handful of gold coins flung uponthe prairie, the brightly violent lights fed by an electric current, theyseemed as distant as the stars and now as unattainable. The energy that hadlighted them was gone, the power that created power stations in emptyprairies had vanished, and she knew of no journey to recapture it. Yet thesehad been her stars—she thought, looking down—these had been her goal, herbeacon, the aspiration drawing her upon her upward course. That which othersclaimed to feel at the sight of the stars—stars safely distant by millions ofyears and thus imposing no obligation to act, but serving as the tinsel offutility—she had felt at the sight of electric bulbs lighting the streets ofa town. It was this earth below that had been the height she had wanted toreach, and she wondered how she had come to lose it, who had made of it aconvict's ball to drag through muck, who had turned its promise of greatnessinto a vision never to be reached. But the town was past, and she had to lookahead, to the mountains of Colorado rising in her way.

The small glass dial on her panel showed that she was now climbing.

The sound of the engine, beating through the metal shell around her,trembling in the wheel against her palms, like the pounding of a heartstrained to a solemn effort, told her of the power carrying her above thepeaks. The earth was now a crumpled sculpture that swayed from side to side,the shape of an explosion still shooting sudden spurts to reach the plane.She saw them as dented black cuts ripping through the milky spread of stars,straight in her path and tearing wider. Her mind one with her body and herbody one with the plane, she fought the invisible suction drawing herdownward, she fought the sudden gusts that tipped the earth as if she wereabout to roll off into the sky, with half of the mountains rolling after. Itwas like fighting a frozen ocean where the touch of a single spray would befatal.

There were stretches of rest when the mountains shrank down, over valleysfilled with fog. Then the fog rose higher to swallow the earth and she wasleft suspended in space, left motionless but for the sound of the engine.

But she did not need to see the earth. The instrument panel was now herpower of sight'—it was the condensed sight of the best minds able to guideher on her way. Their condensed sight, she thought, offered to hers andrequiring only that she be able to read it. How had they been paid for it,they, the sight-givers? From condensed milk to condensed music to thecondensed sight of precision instruments—what wealth had they not given tothe world and what had they received in return?

Where were they now? Where was Dwight Sanders? Where was the inventor ofher motor?

The fog was lifting—and in a sudden clearing, she saw a drop of fire on aspread of rock. It was not an electric light, it was a lonely flame in thedarkness of the earth. She knew where she was and she knew that flame: it wasWyatt's Torch.

She was coming close to her goal. Somewhere behind her, in the northeast,stood the summits pierced by the Taggart Tunnel. The mountains were sliding

in a long descent into the steadier soil of Utah. She let her plane slipcloser to the earth.

The stars were vanishing, the sky was growing darker, but in the bank ofclouds to the east thin cracks were beginning to appear—first as threads,then faint spots of reflection, then straight bands that were not yet pink,but no longer blue, the color of a future light, the first hints of thecoming sunrise. They kept appearing and vanishing, slowly growing clearer,leaving the sky darker, then breaking it wider apart, like a promisestruggling to be fulfilled. She heard a piece of music beating in her mind,one she seldom liked to recall: not Halley's Fifth Concerto, but his Fourth,the cry of a tortured struggle, with the chords of its theme breakingthrough, like a distant vision to be reached.

She saw the Afton airport from across a span of miles, first as a squareof sparks, then as a sunburst of white rays. It was lighted for a plane aboutto take off, and she had to wait for her landing. Circling in the outerdarkness above the field, she saw the silver body of a plane rising like aphoenix out of the white fire and—in a straight line, almost leaving aninstant's trail of light to hang in space behind it—going off toward theeast.

Then she swept down in its stead, to dive into the luminous funnel ofbeams—she saw a strip of cement flying at her face, she felt the jolt of thewheels stopping it in time, then the streak of her motion ebbing out and theplane being tamed to the safety of a car, as it taxied smoothly off therunway.

It was a small private airfield, serving the meager traffic of a fewindustrial concerns still remaining in Afton, She saw a lone attendanthurrying to meet her. She leaped down to the ground the moment the planestood still, the hours of the flight swept from her mind by the impatienceover the stretch of a few more minutes.

"Can I get a car somewhere to drive me to the Institute of Technology atonce?" she asked.

The attendant looked at her, puzzled. "Why, yes, I guess so, ma'am.But . . . but what for? There's nobody there.""Mr. Quentin Daniels is there."

The attendant shook his head slowly—then jerked his thumb, pointing eastto the shrinking taillights of the plane. "There's Mr. Daniels going now.""What?"

"He just left.""Left? Why?"

"He went with the man who flew in for him two-three hours ago.""What man?"

"Don't know, never saw him before, but, boy!—he's got a beauty of a ship!"

She was back at the wheel, she was speeding down the runway, she wasrising into the air, her plane like a bullet aimed at two sparks of red andgreen light that were twinkling away into the eastern sky—while she was stillrepeating, "Oh no, they don't! They don't! They don't!

They don't!"

Once and for all—she thought, clutching the wheel as if it were the enemynot to be relinquished, her words like separate explosions with a trail offire in her mind to link them—once and for all ... to meet the destroyerface to face ... to learn who he is and where he goes to vanish . . . notthe motor . . . he is not to carry the motor away into the darkness of hismonstrously closed unknown . . . he is not to escape, this time. . . .

A band of light was rising in the east and it seemed to come from theearth, as a breath long-held and released. In the deep blue above it, thestranger's plane was a single spark changing color and flashing from side toside, like the tip of a pendulum swinging in the darkness, beating time.

The curve of distance made the spark drop closer to the earth, and shepushed her throttle wide open, not to let the spark out of her sight, not tolet it touch the horizon and vanish. The light was flowing into the sky, asif drawn from the earth by the stranger's plane. The plane was headedsoutheast, and she was following it into the coming sunrise.

From the transparent green of ice, the sky melted into pale gold, and thegold spread into a lake under a fragile film of pink glass, the color of thatforgotten morning which was the first she had seen on earth. The clouds weredropping away in long shreds of smoky blue. She kept her eyes on thestranger's plane, as if her glance were a towline pulling her ship. Thestranger's plane was now a small black cross, like a shrinking check mark onthe glowing sky.

Then she noticed that the clouds were not dropping, that they stoodcongealed on the edge of the earth—and she realized that the plane was headedtoward the mountains of Colorado, that the struggle against the invisiblestorm lay ahead for her once more. She noted it without emotion; she did notwonder whether her ship or her body had the power to attempt it again. Solong as she was able to move, she would move to follow the speck that wasfleeing away with the last of her world. She felt nothing but the emptinessleft by a fire that had been hatred and anger and the desperate impulse of afight to the kill; these had fused into a single icy streak, the singleresolve to follow the stranger, whoever he was, wherever he took her, tofollow and . . . she added nothing in her mind, but, unstated, what lay atthe bottom of the emptiness was: and give her life, if she could take hisfirst.

Like an instrument set to automatic control, her body was performing themotions of driving the plane—with the mountains reeling in a bluish fog belowand the dented peaks rising in her path as smoky formations of a deadlierblue. She noticed that the distance to the stranger's plane had shrunk: hehad checked his speed for the dangerous crossing, while she had gone on,unconscious of the danger, with only the muscles of her arms and legsfighting to keep her plane aloft. A brief, tight movement of her lips was asclose as she could come to a smile: it was he who was flying her plane forher, she thought; he had given her the power to follow him with asomnambulist's unerring skill.

As if responding of itself to his control, the needle of her altimeter wasslowly moving upward. She was rising and she went on rising and she wonderedwhen her breath and her propeller would fail.

He was going southeast, toward the highest mountains that obstructed thepath of the sun.

It was his plane that was struck by the first sunray. It flashed for aninstant, like a burst of white fire, sending rays to shoot from its wings.

The peaks of the mountains came next: she saw the sunlight reaching thesnow in the crevices, then trickling down the granite sides; it cut violentshadows on the ledges and brought the mountains into the Jiving finality of aform.

They were flying over the wildest stretch of Colorado, uninhabited,uninhabitable, inaccessible to men on foot or plane. No landing was possiblewithin a radius of a hundred miles; she glanced at her fuel gauge: she hadone half-hour left. The stranger was heading straight toward another, higherrange. She wondered why he chose a course no air route did or ever wouldtravel. She wished this range were behind her; it was the last effort shecould hope to make.

The stranger's plane was suddenly slacking its speed. He was losingaltitude just when she had expected him to climb. The granite barrier wasrising In his path, moving to meet him, reaching for his wings—but the long,smooth line of his motion was sliding down. She could detect no break, no

jolt, no sign of mechanical failure; it looked like the even movement of acontrolled intention. With a sudden flash of sunlight on its wings, the planebanked into a long curve, rays dripping like water from its body—then wentinto the broad, smooth circles of a spiral, as if circling for a landingwhere no landing was conceivable.

She watched, not trying to explain it, not believing what she saw, waitingfor the upward thrust that would throw him back on his course. But the easy,gliding circles went on dropping, toward a ground she could not see and darednot think of. . . Like remnants of broken jaws, strings of granite denturesstood between her ship and his; she could not tell what lay at the bottom ofhis spiral motion.

She knew only that it did not look like, but was certain to be, the motionof a suicide.

She saw the sunlight glitter on his wings for an instant. Then, like thebody of a man diving chest-first and arms outstretched, serenely abandoned tothe sweep of the fall, the plane went down and vanished behind the ridges ofrock.

She flew on, almost waiting for it to reappear, unable to believe that shehad witnessed a horrible catastrophe taking place so simply and quietly. Sheflew on to where the plane had dropped. It seemed to be a valley in a ring ofgranite walls.

She reached the valley and looked down. There was no possible place for alanding. There was no sign of a plane.

The bottom of the valley looked like a stretch of the earth's crustmangled in the days when the earth was cooling, left irretrievable eversince. It was a stretch of rocks ground against one another, with bouldershanging in precarious formations, with long, dark crevices and a fewcontorted pine trees growing half-horizontally into the air.

There was no level piece of soil the size of a handkerchief. There was noplace for a plane to hide. There was no remnant of a plane's wreck.

She banked sharply, circling above the valley, dropping down a little. Bysome trick of light, which she could not explain, the floor of the valleyseemed more clearly visible than the rest of the earth.

She could distinguish it well enough to, know that the plane was notthere; yet this was not possible.

She circled, dropping down farther. She glanced around her—and for onefrightening moment, she thought that it was a quiet summer morning, that shewas alone, lost in a region of the Rocky Mountains which no plane should everventure to approach, and, with the last of her fuel burning away, she waslooking for a plane that had never existed, in quest of a destroyer who hadvanished as he always vanished; perhaps it was only his vision that had ledher here to be destroyed. In the next moment, she shook her head, pressed hermouth tighter and dropped farther.

She thought that she could not abandon an incalculable wealth such as thebrain of Quentin Daniels on one of those rocks below, if he was still aliveand within her reach to help. She had dropped inside the circle of thevalley's walls. It was a dangerous job of flying, the space was much tootight, but she went on circling and dropping lower, her life hanging on hereyesight, and her eyesight flashing between two tasks: searching the floor ofthe valley and watching the granite walls that seemed about to rip her wings.

She knew the danger only as part of the job. It had no personal meaningany longer. The savage thing she felt was almost enjoyment. It was the lastrage of a lost battle. No!—she was crying in her mind, crying it to thedestroyer, to the world she had left, to the years behind her, to the longprogression of defeat—No! . . .No!

. . . No! . . .

Her eyes swept past the instrument panel—and then she sat still but forthe sound of a gasp. Her altimeter had stood at 11,000 feet the last time sheremembered seeing it. Now it stood at 10,000. But the floor of the valley hadnot changed. It had come no closer. It remained as distant as at her firstglance down.

She knew that the figure 8,000 meant the level of the ground in this partof Colorado. She had not noticed the length of her descent.

She had not noticed that the ground, which had seemed too clear and tooclose from the height, was now too dim and too far. She was looking at thesame rocks from the same perspective, they had grown no larger, their shadowshad not moved, and the oddly unnatural light still hung over the bottom ofthe valley.

She thought that her altimeter was off, and she went on circling downward.She saw the needle of her dial moving down;, she saw the walls of granitemoving up, she saw the ring of mountains growing higher, its peaks comingcloser together in the sky—but the floor of the valley remained unchanged, asif she were dropping down a well with a bottom never to be reached. Theneedle moved to 9,500—

to 9,300-to 9,000-to 8,700.

The flash of light that hit her had no source. It was as if the air withinand beyond the plane became an explosion of blinding cold fire, sudden andsoundless. The shock threw her back, her hands off the wheel and over hereyes. In the break of an instant, when she seized the wheel again, the lightwas gone, but her ship was spinning.

her ears were bursting with silence and her propeller stood stifflystraight before her: her motor was dead.

She tried to pull for a rise, but the ship was going down—and what she sawflying at her face was not the spread of mangled boulders, but the greengrass of a field where no field had been before.

There was no time to see the rest. There was no time to think ofexplanations. There was no time to come out of the spin. The earth was agreen ceiling coming down upon her, a few hundred swiftly shrinking feetaway.

Flung from side to side, like a battered pendulum, clinging to the wheel,half in her seat, half on her knees, she fought to pull the ship into aglide, for an attempt to make a belly-landing, while the green ground waswhirling about her, sweeping above her, then below, its spiral coils comingcloser. Her arms pulling at the wheel, with no chance to know whether shecould succeed, with her space and time running out—she felt, in a flash ofits full, violent purity, that special sense of existence which had alwaysbeen hers. In a moment's consecration to her love—to her rebellious denial ofdisaster, to her love of life and of the matchless value that was herself—shefelt the fiercely proud certainty that she would survive.

And in answer to the earth that flew to meet her, she heard in her mind,as her mockery at fate, as her cry of defiance, the words of the sentence shehated—the words of defeat, of despair and of a plea for help: "Oh hell! Whois John Gait?"

PART IIIA is A

CHAPTER IATLANTIS

When she opened her eyes, she saw sunlight, green leaves and a man's face.She thought: I know what this is. This was the world as she had expected tosee it at sixteen—and now she had reached it—and it seemed so simple, sounastonishing, that the thing she felt was like a blessing pronounced uponthe universe by means of three words: But of course.

She was looking up at the face of a man who knelt by her side, and sheknew that in all the years behind her, this was what she would have given herlife to see: a face that bore no mark of pain or fear or guilt. The shape ofhis mouth was pride, and more: it was as if he took pride in being proud. Theangular planes of his cheeks made her think of arrogance, of tension, ofscorn—yet the face had none of these qualities, it had their final sum: alook of serene determination and of certainty, and the look of a ruthlessinnocence which would not seek forgiveness or grant it. It was a face thathad nothing to hide or to escape, a face with no fear of being seen, or ofseeing, so that the first thing she grasped about him was the intenseperceptiveness of his eyes—he looked as if his faculty of sight were hisbest-loved tool and its exercise were a limitless, joyous adventure, as ifhis eyes imparted a superlative value to himself and to the world—to himselffor his ability to see, to the world for being a place so eagerly worthseeing. It seemed to her for a moment that she was in the presence of a beingwho was pure consciousness—yet she had never been so aware of a man's body.The light cloth of his shirt seemed to stress, rather than hide, thestructure of his figure, his skin was suntanned, his body had the hardness,the gaunt, tensile strength, the clean precision of a foundry casting, helooked as if he were poured out of metal, but some dimmed, soft-lusteredmetal, like an aluminum-copper alloy, the color of his skin blending with thechestnut-brown of his hair, the loose strands of the hair shading from brownto gold in the sun, and his eyes completing the colors, as the one part ofthe casting left undimmed and harshly lustrous: his eyes were the deep, darkgreen of light glinting on metal.

He was looking down at her with the faint trace of a smile, it was not alook of discovery, but of familiar contemplation—as if he, too, were seeingthe long-expected and the never-doubted.

This was her world, she thought, this was the way men were meant to be andto face their existence—and all the rest of it, all the years of ugliness andstruggle were only someone's senseless joke. She smiled at him, as at afellow conspirator, in relief, in deliverance, in radiant mockery of all thethings she would never have to consider important again. He smiled in answer,it was the same smile as her own, as if he felt what she felt and knew whatshe meant.

"We never had to take any of it seriously, did we?" she whispered."No, we never had to."

And then, her consciousness returning fully, she realized that this manwas a total stranger.

She tried to draw away from him, but it was only a faint movement of herhead on the grass she felt under her hair. She tried to rise.

A shot of pain across her back threw her down again.

"Don't move, Miss Taggart. You're hurt."

"You know me?" Her voice was impersonal and hard.

"I've known you for many years."

"Have I known you?"

"Yes, I think so."

"What is your name?"

"John Gait."

She looked at him, not moving."Why are you frightened?" he asked."Because I believe it."

He smiled, as if grasping a full confession of the meaning she attached tohis name; the smile held an adversary's acceptance of a challenge—and anadult's amusement at the self-deception of a child.

She felt as if she were returning to consciousness after a crash that hadshattered more than an airplane. She could not reassemble the pieces now, shecould not recall the things she had known about his name, she knew only thatit stood for a dark vacuum which she would slowly have to fill. She could notdo it now, this man was too blinding a presence, like a spotlight that wouldnot let her see the shapes strewn hi the outer darkness.

"Was it you that I was following?" she asked.

"Yes."

She glanced slowly around her. She was lying in the grass of a field atthe foot of a granite drop that came down from thousands of feet away in theblue sky. On the other edge of the field, some crags and pines and theglittering leaves of birch trees hid the space that stretched to a distantwall of encircling mountains. Her plane was not shattered—

it was there, a few feet away, flat on its belly in the grass. There wasno other plane in sight, no structures, no sign of human habitation.

"What is this valley?" she asked.

He smiled, "The Taggart Terminal."

"What do you mean?"

"You'll find out."

A dim impulse, like the recoil of an antagonist, made her want to check onwhat strength was left to her. She could move her arms and legs; she couldlift her head; she felt a stabbing pain when she breathed deeply; she saw athin thread of blood running down her stocking.

"Can one get out of this place?" she asked.

His voice seemed earnest, but the glint of the metal-green eyes was asmile: "Actually—no. Temporarily—yes."

She made a movement to rise. He bent to lift her, but she gathered herstrength in a swift, sudden jolt and slipped out of his grasp, struggling tostand up. "I think I can—" she started saying, and collapsed against him theinstant her feet rested on the ground, a stab of pain shooting up from anankle that would not hold her.

He lifted her in his arms and smiled. "No, you can't, Miss Taggart,"

he said, and started off across the field.

She lay still, her arms about him, her head on his shoulder, and shethought: For just a few moments—while this lasts—it is all right to surrendercompletely—to forget everything and just permit yourself to feel. . . . Whenhad she experienced it before?—she wondered; there had been a moment whenthese had been the words in her mind, but she could not remember it now. Shehad known it, once—this feeling of certainty, of the final, the reached, thenot-to-be-questioned. But it was new to feel protected, and to feel that itwas right to accept the protection, to surrender—right, because this peculiarsense of safety was not protection against the future, but against the past,not the protection of being spared from battle, but of having won it, not aprotection granted to her weakness, but to her strength. . . . Aware withabnormal intensity of the pressure of his hands against her body, of the goldand copper threads of his hair, the shadows of his lashes on the skin of hisface a few inches away from hers, she wondered dimly: Protected, from what? .. . it's he who was the enemy . . . was he?

. . . why? . . . She did not know, she could not think of it now. It tookan effort to remember that she had had a goal and a motive a few hours ago.She forced herself to recapture it.

"Did you know that I was following you?" she asked.

"No. "

"Where is your plane?"

"At the landing field."

"Where is the landing field?"

"On the other side of the valley."

"There was no landing field in this valley, when I looked down, There wasno meadow, either. How did it get here?"

He glanced at the sky. "Look carefully. Do you see anything up there?"

She dropped her head back, looking straight into the sky, seeing nothingbut the peaceful blue of morning. After a while she distinguished a few faintstrips of shimmering air.

"Heat waves," she said.

"Refractor rays," he answered. "The valley bottom that you saw is amountain top eight thousand feet high, five miles away from here.""A . . . what?"

"A mountain top that no flyer would ever choose for a landing.What you saw was its reflection projected over this valley.""How?"

"By the same method as a mirage on a desert: an image refracted from alayer of heated air.""How?"

"By a screen of rays calculated against everything—except a courage suchas yours."

"What do you mean?"

"I never thought that any plane would attempt to drop within seven hundredfeet of the ground. You hit the ray screen. Some of the rays are the kindthat kill magnetic motors. Well, that's the second time you beat me: I'venever been followed, either,"

"Why do you keep that screen?"

"Because this place is private property intended to remain as such.""What is this place?"

"I'll show it to you, now that you're here, Miss Taggart. I'll answerquestions after you've seen it."

She remained silent. She noticed that she had asked questions about everysubject, but not about him. It was as if he were a single whole, grasped byher first glance at him, like some irreducible absolute, like an axiom not tobe explained any further, as if she knew everything about him by directperception, and what awaited her now was only the process of identifying herknowledge.

He was carrying her down a narrow trail that went winding to the bottom ofthe valley. On the slopes around them, the tall, dark pyramids of firs stoodimmovably straight, in masculine simplicity, like sculpture reduced to anessential form, and they clashed with the complex, feminine, over detailedlace-work of the birch leaves trembling in the sun.

The leaves let the sunrays fall through to sweep across his hair, acrossboth their faces. She could not see what lay below, beyond the turns of thetrail.

Her eyes kept coming back to his face. He glanced down at her once in awhile. At first, she looked away, as if she had been caught.

Then, as if learning it from him, she held his glance whenever he chose tolook down—knowing that he knew what she felt and that he did not hide fromher the meaning of his glance.

She knew that his silence was the same confession as her own. He did nothold her in the impersonal manner of a man carrying a wounded woman. It wasan embrace, even though she felt no suggestion of it in his bearing; she feltit only by means of her certainty that his whole body was aware of holdinghers.

She heard the sound of the waterfall before she saw the fragile threadthat fell in broken strips of glitter down the ledges. The sound came throughsome dim beat in her mind, some faint rhythm that seemed no louder than astruggling memory—but they went past and the beat remained; she listened tothe sound of the water, but another sound seemed to grow clearer, rising, notin her mind, but from somewhere among the leaves. The trail turned, and in asudden clearing she saw a small house on a ledge below, with a flash of sunon the pane of an open window. In the moment when she knew what experiencehad once made her want to surrender to the immediate present—it had been thenight in a dusty coach of the Comet, when she had heard the. theme ofHalley's Fifth Concerto for the first time—she knew that she was hearing itnow, hearing it rise from the keyboard of a piano, in the clear, sharp chordsof someone's powerful, confident touch.

She snapped the question at his face, as if hoping to catch himunprepared: "That's the Fifth Concerto by Richard Halley, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"When did he write it?"

"Why don't you ask him that in person?""Is he here?"

"It's he who's playing it. That's his house.""Oh . . . !"

"You'll meet him, later. He'll be glad to speak to you. He knows that hisworks are the only records you like to play, in the evening, when you arealone."

"How does he know that?"

"I told him."

The look on her face was like a question that would have begun with "Howin hell . . . ?"—but she saw the look of his eyes, and she laughed, herlaughter giving sound to the meaning of his glance.

She could not question anything, she thought, she could not doubt, notnow—not with the sound of that music rising triumphantly through the sun-drenched leaves, the music of release, of deliverance, played as it wasintended to be played, as her mind had struggled to hear it in a rockingcoach through the beat of wounded wheels—it was this that her mind had seenin the sounds, that night—this valley and the morning sun and—

And then she gasped, because the trail had turned and from the height ofan open ledge she saw the town on the floor of the valley.

It was not a town, only a cluster of houses scattered at random from thebottom to the rising steps of the mountains that went on rising above theirroofs, enclosing them within an abrupt, impassable circle.

They were homes, small and new, with naked, angular shapes and the glitterof broad windows. Far in the distance, some structures seemed taller, and thefaint coils of smoke above them suggested an industrial district. But closebefore her, rising on a slender granite column from a ledge below to thelevel of her eyes, blinding her by its glare, dimming the rest, stood adollar sign three feet tall, made of solid gold. It hung in space above thetown, as its coat-of-arms, its trademark, its beacon—

and it caught the sunrays, like some transmitter of energy that sent themin shining blessing to stretch horizontally through the air above the roofs,"What's that?" she gasped, pointing at the sign.

"Oh, that's Francisco's private joke."

"Francisco—who?" she whispered, knowing the answer.

"Francisco d'Anconia."

"Is he here, too?"

"He will be, any day now."

"What do you mean, his joke?"

"He gave that sign as an anniversary present to the owner of this place.And then we all adopted it as our particular emblem. We liked the idea.""Aren't you the owner of this place?"

"I? No." He glanced down at the foot of the ledge and added, pointing,"There's the owner of this place, coming now."

A car had stopped at the end of a dirt road below, and two men werehurrying up the trail. She could not distinguish their faces; one of them wasslender and tall, the other shorter, more muscular. She lost sight of thembehind the twists of the trail, as he went on carrying her down to meet them.

She met them when they emerged suddenly from behind a rocky corner a fewfeet away. The sight of their faces hit her with the abruptness of acollision.

"Well, I'll be goddamned!" said the muscular man, whom she did not know,staring at her.

She was staring at the tall, distinguished figure of his companion: it wasHugh Akston.

It was Hugh Akston who spoke first, bowing to her with a courteous smileof welcome. "Miss Taggart, this is the first time anyone has ever proved mewrong, I didn't know—when I told you you'd never find him —that the next timeI saw you, you would be in his arms."

"In whose arms?"

"Why, the inventor of the motor."

She gasped, closing her eyes; this was one connection she knew she shouldhave made. When she opened her eyes, she was looking at Gait, He was smiling,family, derisively, as if he knew fully what this meant to her.

"It would have served you right if you'd broken your neck!" the muscularman snapped at her, with the anger of concern, almost of affection. "What astunt to pull—for a person who'd have been admitted here so eagerly, if she'dchosen to come through the front door!"

"Miss Taggart, may I present Midas Mulligan?" said Gait.

"Oh," she said weakly, and laughed; she had no capacity for astonishmentany longer. "Do you suppose I was killed in that crash—and this is some otherkind of existence?"

"It is another kind of existence," said Gait. "But as for being killed,doesn't it seem more like the other way around?"

"Oh yes," she whispered, "yes . . ." She smiled at Mulligan. "Where is thefront door?"

"Here," he said, pointing to his forehead.

"I've lost the key," she said simply, without resentment. "I've lost allkeys, right now."

"You'll find them. But what in blazes were you doing in that plane?""Following."

"Him?" He pointed at Gait."Yes."

"You're lucky to be alive! Are you badly hurt?""I don't think so."

"You'll have a few questions to answer, after they patch you up." Heturned brusquely, leading the way down to the car, then glanced at Gait."Well, what do we do now? There's something we hadn't provided for: the firstscab."

"The first . . . what?" she asked.

"Skip it," said Mulligan, and looked at Gait. "What do we do?"

"It will be my charge," said Gait. "I will be responsible. You takeQuentin Daniels."

"Oh, he's no problem at all. He needs nothing but to get acquainted withthe place. He seems to know all the rest,"

"Yes. He had practically gone the whole way by himself." He saw herwatching him in bewilderment, and said, "There's one thing I must thank youfor, Miss Taggart: you did pay me a compliment when you chose Quentin Danielsas my understudy. He was a plausible one."

"Where is he?" she asked. "Will you tell me what happened?"

"Why, Midas met us at the landing field, drove me to my house and tookDaniels with him. I was going to join them for breakfast, but I saw yourplane spinning and plunging for that pasture. I was the closest one to thescene."

"We got here as fast as we could," said Mulligan. "I thought he deservedto get himself killed—whoever was in that plane. I never dreamed that it wasone of the only two persons in the whole world whom I'd exempt."

"Who is the other one?" she asked.

"Hank Rearden."

She winced; it was like a sudden blow from another great distance.

She wondered why it seemed to her that Gait was watching her face intentlyand that she saw an instant's change in his, too brief to define.

They had come to the car. It was a Hammond convertible, its top down, oneof the costliest models, some years old, but kept in the shining trim ofefficient handling. Gait placed her cautiously in the back seat and held herin the circle of his arm. She felt a stabbing pain once in a while, but shehad no attention to spare for it. She watched the distant houses of the town,as Mulligan pressed the starter and the car moved forward, as they went pastthe sign of the dollar and a golden ray hit her eyes, sweeping over herforehead.

"Who is the owner of this place?" she asked."I am," said Mulligan."What is he?" She pointed to Gait.Mulligan chuckled. "He just works here.""And you, Dr. Akston?" she asked.

He glanced at Gait, "I'm one of his two fathers, Miss Taggart. The one whodidn't betray him."

"Oh!" she said, as another connection fell into place. "Your third pupil?""That's right."

"The second assistant bookkeeper!" she moaned suddenly, at one morememory.

"What's that?"

"That's what Dr. Stadler called him. That's what Dr. Stadler told me hethought his third pupil had become."

"He overestimated," said Gait. "I'm much lower than that by the scale ofhis standards and of his world."

The car had swerved into a lane rising toward a lonely house that stood ona ridge above the valley. She saw a man walking down a path, ahead of them,hastening in the direction of the town. He wore blue denim overalls andcarried a lunchbox. There was something faintly familiar in the swiftabruptness of his Gait. As the car went past him, she caught a glimpse of hisface—and she jerked backward, her voice rising to a scream from the pain ofthe movement and from the shock of the sight: "Oh, stop! Stop! Don't let himgo!" It was Ellis Wyatt.

The three men laughed, but Mulligan stopped the car. "Oh ..."

she said weakly, in apology, realizing she had forgotten that this was theplace from which Wyatt would not vanish.

Wyatt was running toward them: he had recognized her, too. When he seizedthe edge of the car, to brake his speed, she saw the face and the young,triumphant smile that she had seen but once before: on the platform of WyattJunction.

"Dagny! You, too, at last? One of us?"

"No," said Gait. "Miss Taggart is a castaway."

"What?"

"Miss Taggart's plane crashed. Didn't you see it?"

"Crashed-here?"

"Yes."

"I heard a plane, but I . . ." His look of bewilderment changed to asmile, regretful, amused and friendly. "I see. Oh, hell, Dagny, it'spreposterous!"

She was staring at him helplessly, unable to reconnect the past to thepresent. And helplessly—as one would say to a dead friend, in a dream, thewords one regrets having missed the chance to say in life-she said, with the memory of a telephone ringing, unanswered, almost twoyears ago, the words she had hoped to say if she ever caught sight of himagain, "I ... I tried to reach you."

He smiled gently. "We've been trying to reach you ever since, Dagny.. . . I'll see you tonight. Don't worry, I won't vanish—and I don't thinkyou will, either."

He waved to the others and went off, swinging his lunchbox. She glancedup, as Mulligan started the car, and saw Gait's eyes watching herattentively. Her face hardened, as if in open admission of pain and indefiance of the satisfaction it might give him. "All right," she said. "I seewhat sort of show you want to put me through the shock of witnessing."

But there was neither cruelty nor pity in his face, only the level look ofjustice. "Our first rule here, Miss Taggart," he answered, "is that one mustalways see for oneself."

The car stopped in front of the lonely house. It was built of roughgranite blocks, with a sheet of glass for most of its front wall. "I'll sendthe doctor over, " said Mulligan, driving off, while Gait carried her up thepath.

"Your house?" she asked.

"Mine," he answered, kicking the door open.

He carried her across the threshold into the glistening space of hisliving room, where shafts of sunlight hit walls of polished pine. She saw afew pieces of furniture made by hand, a ceiling of bare rafters, an archwayopen upon a small kitchen with rough shelves, a bare wooden table and theastonishing sight of chromium glittering on an electric stove; the place hadthe primitive simplicity of a frontiersman's cabin, reduced to essentialnecessities, but reduced with a super-modern skill.

He carried her across the sunrays into a small guest room and placed herdown on a bed. She noticed a window open upon a long slant of rocky steps andpines going off into the sky. She noticed small streaks that looked likeinscriptions cut into the wood of the walls, a few scattered lines thatseemed made by different handwritings; she could not distinguish the words.She noticed another door, left half-open; it led to his bedroom.

"Am I a guest here or a prisoner?" she asked.

"The choice will be yours, Miss Taggart."

"I can make no choice when I'm dealing with a stranger.""But you're not Didn't you name a railroad line after me?"

"Oh! . . . Yes . . ."It was the small jolt of another connection fallinginto place. "Yes, I—" She was looking at the tall figure with the sun-streaked hair, with the suppressed smile in the mercilessly perceptive eyes-she was seeing the struggle to build her Line and the summer day of the first

train's run—she was thinking that if a human figure could be fashioned as anemblem of that Line, this was the figure.

"Yes ... I did ..." Then, remembering the rest, she added, "But Inamed it after an enemy."

He smiled. "That's the contradiction you had to resolve sooner or later,Miss Taggart."

"It was you . . . wasn't it? . . . who destroyed my Line. . . .""Why, no. It was the contradiction."

She closed her eyes; in a moment, she asked, "All those stories I heardabout you—which of them were true?""All of them."

"Was it you who spread them?"

"No. What for? I never had any wish to be talked about.""But you do know that you've become a legend?""Yes."

"The young inventor of the Twentieth Century Motor Company is the one realversion of the legend, isn't it?"

"The one that's concretely real—yes."

She could not say it indifferently; there was still a breathless tone andthe drop of her voice toward a whisper, when she asked, "The motor . . . themotor I found ... it was you who made it?"

"Yes."

She could not prevent the jolt of eagerness that threw her head up.

"The secret of transforming energy—" she began, and stopped, "I could tellit to you in fifteen minutes," he said, in answer to the desperate plea shehad not uttered, "but there's no power on earth that can force me to tell it.If you understand this, you'll understand everything that's baffling you."

"That night . . . twelve years ago ... a spring night when you walkedout of a meeting of six thousand murderers—that story is true, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"You told them that you would stop the motor of the world.""I have."

"What have you done?"

"I've done nothing, Miss Taggart. And that's the whole of my secret."

She looked at him silently for a long moment. He stood waiting, as if hecould read her thoughts. "The destroyer—" she said in a tone of wonder andhelplessness.

"—the most evil creature that's ever existed," he said in the tone of aquotation, and she recognized her own words, "the man who's draining thebrains of the world."

"How thoroughly have you been watching me," she asked, "and for how long?"

It was only an instant's pause, his eyes did not move, but it seemed toher that his glance was stressed, as if in special awareness of seeing her,and she caught the sound of some particular intensity in his voice as heanswered quietly, "For years."

She closed her eyes, relaxing and giving up. She felt an odd, lightheartedindifference, as if she suddenly wanted nothing but the comfort ofsurrendering to helplessness.

The doctor who arrived was a gray-haired man with a mild, thoughtful faceand a firmly, unobtrusively confident manner.

"Miss Taggart, may I present Dr. Hendricks?" said Gait.

"Not Dr, Thomas Hendricks?" she gasped, with the involuntary rudeness of achild; the name belonged to a great surgeon, who had retired and vanished sixyears ago.

"Yes, of course," said Gait.

Dr. Hendricks smiled at her, in answer. "Midas told me that Miss Taggarthas to be treated for shock," he said, "not for the one sustained, but forthe ones to come."

"I'll leave you to do it," said Gait, "while I go to the market to getsupplies for breakfast."

She watched the rapid efficiency of Dr. Hendricks' work, as he examinedher injuries. He had brought an object she had never seen before: a portableX-ray machine. She learned that she had torn the cartilage of two ribs, thatshe had sprained an ankle, ripped patches of skin off one knee and one elbow,and acquired a few bruises spread in purple blotches over her body. By thetime Dr. Hendricks' swift, competent hands had wound the bandages and thetight lacings of tape, she felt as if her body were an engine checked by anexpert mechanic, and no further care was necessary, "I would advise you toremain in bed, Miss Taggart."

"Oh no! If I'm careful and move slowly, I'll be all right."

"You ought to rest."

"Do you think I can?"

He smiled. "I guess not."

She was dressed by the time Gait came back. Dr. Hendricks gave him anaccount of her condition, adding, "I'll be back to check up, tomorrow.""Thanks," said Gait. "Send the bill to me."

"Certainly not!" she said indignantly. "I will pay it myself."The two men glanced at each other, in amusement, as at the boast of abeggar.

"We'll discuss that later," said Gait.

Dr. Hendricks left, and she tried to stand up, limping, catching at thefurniture for support. Gait lifted her in his arms, carried her to thekitchen alcove and placed her on a chair by the table set for two.

She noticed that she was hungry, at the sight of the coffee pot boiling onthe stove, the two glasses of orange juice, the heavy white pottery dishessparkling in the sun on the polished table top.

"When did you sleep or eat last?" he asked.

"I don't know ... I had dinner on the train, with—" She shook her headin helplessly bitter amusement: with the tramp, she thought, with a desperatevoice pleading for escape from an avenger who would not pursue or be found—the avenger who sat facing her across the table, drinking a glass of orangejuice. "I don't know ... it seems centuries and continents away."

"How did you happen to be following me?"

"I landed at the Alton airport just as you were taking off. The man theretold me that Quentin Daniels had gone with you."

"I remember your plane circling to land. But that was the one and onlytime when I didn't think of you. I thought you were coming by train."

She asked, looking straight at him, "How do you want me to understandthat?"

"What?"

"The one and only time when you didn't think of me."

He held her glance; she saw the faint movement she had noted as typical ofhim: the movement of his proudly intractable mouth curving into the hint of asmile. "In any way you wish," he answered.

She let a moment pass to underscore her choice by the severity of herface, then asked coldly, in the tone of an enemy's accusation, "You knew thatI was coming for Quentin Daniels?"

"Yes."

"You got him first and fast, in order not to let me reach him? In order tobeat me—knowing fully what sort of beating that would mean for me?""Sure."

It was she who looked away and remained silent. He rose to cook the restof their breakfast. She watched him as he stood at the stove, toasting bread,frying eggs and bacon. There was an easy, relaxed skill about the way heworked, but it was a skill that belonged to another profession; his handsmoved with the rapid precision of an engineer pulling the levers of a controlboard. She remembered suddenly where she had seen as expert and preposterousa performance.

"Is that what you learned from Dr. Akston?" she asked, pointing at thestove.

"That, among other things."

"Did he teach you to spend your time—your time!—" she could not keep theshudder of indignation out of her voice—"on this sort of work?""I've spent time on work of much lesser importance."

When he put her plate before her, she asked, "Where did you get that food?Do they have a grocery store here?"

"The best one in the world. It's run by Lawrence Hammond.""What?"

"Lawrence Hammond, of Hammond Cars. The bacon is from the farm of DwightSanders—of Sanders Aircraft. The eggs and the butter from Judge Narragansett—of the Superior Court of the State of Illinois."

She looked at her plate, bitterly, almost as if she were afraid to touchit. "It's the most expensive breakfast I'll ever eat, considering the valueof the cook's time and of all those others."

"Yes—from one aspect. But from another, it's the cheapest breakfast you'llever eat—because no part of it has gone to feed the looters who'll make youpay for it through year after year and leave you to starve in the end."

After a long silence, she asked simply, almost wistfully, "What is it thatyou're all doing here?"

"Living."

She had never heard that word sound so real, "What is your job?" sheasked. "Midas Mulligan said that you work here.""I'm the handy man, I guess.""The what?"

"I'm on call whenever anything goes wrong with any of the installations—with the power system, for instance."

She looked at him—and suddenly she tore forward, staring at the electricstove, but fell back on her chair, stopped by pain.

He chuckled. "Yes, that's true—but take it easy or Dr. Hendricks willorder you back to bed."

"The power system . . ." she said, choking, "the power system here . . .it's run by means of your motor?"

"Yes."

"It's built? It's working? It's functioning?""It has cooked your breakfast.""I want to see it!"

"Don't bother crippling yourself to look at that stove. It's just a plainelectric stove like any other, only about a hundred times cheaper to run.And that's all you'll have a chance to see, Miss Taggart.""You promised to show me this valley.""I'll show it to you. But not the power generator.""Will you take me to see the place now, as soon as we finish?""If you wish—and if you're able to move.""I am."

He got up, went to the telephone and dialed a number. "Hello, Midas? . . .Yes. ... He did? Yes, she's all right. . . . Will you rent me your car forthe day? . . . Thanks. At the usual rate—

twenty-five cents, .... Can you send it over? ... Do you happen tohave some sort of cane? She'll need it. . . . Tonight? Yes, I think so.We will. Thanks."

He hung up. She was staring at him incredulously.

"Did I understand you to say that Mr. Mulligan—who's worth about twohundred million dollars, I believe—is going to charge youtwenty-five cents for the use of his car?""That's right."

"Good heavens, couldn't he give it to you as a courtesy?"

He sat looking at her for a moment, studying her face, as if deliberatelyletting her see the amusement in his. "Miss Taggart," he said, "we have nolaws in this valley, no rules, no formal organization of any kind. We comehere because we want to rest. But we have certain customs, which we allobserve, because they pertain to the things we need to rest from. So I'llwarn you now that there is one word which is forbidden in this valley: theword 'give,' "

"I'm sorry," she said. "You're right."

He refilled her cup of coffee and extended a package of cigarettes.

She smiled, as she took a cigarette: it bore the sign of the dollar.

"If you're not too tired by evening," he said, "Mulligan has invited usfor dinner. He'll have some guests there whom, I think, you'll want to meet."

"Oh, of course! I won't be too tired. I don't think I'll ever feel tiredagain."

They were finishing breakfast when she saw Mulligan's car stopping infront of the house. The driver leaped out, raced up the path and rushed intothe room, not pausing to ring or knock. It took her a moment to realize thatthe eager, breathless, disheveled young man was Quentin Daniels.

"Miss Taggart," he gasped, "I'm sorry!" The desperate guilt in his voiceclashed with the joyous excitement in his face, "I've never broken my wordbefore! There's no excuse for it, I can't ask you to forgive me, and I knowthat you won't believe it, but the truth is that I—

I forgot!"

She glanced at Gait, "I believe you."

"I forgot that I promised to wait, I forgot everything—until a few minutesago, when Mr. Mulligan told me that you'd crashed here in a plane, and then Iknew it was my fault, and if anything had happened to you—oh God, are you allright?"

"Yes. Don't worry. Sit down."

"I don't know how one can forget one's word of honor. I don't know whathappened to me.""I do."

"Miss Taggart, I had been working on it for months, on that one particularhypothesis, and the more I worked, the more hopeless it seemed to become. I'dbeen in my laboratory for the last two days, trying to solve a mathematicalequation that looked impossible. I felt I'd die at that blackboard, butwouldn't give up. It was late at night when he came in. I don't think I evennoticed him, not really. He said he wanted to speak to me and I asked him towait and went right on.

I think I forgot his presence. I don't know how long he stood there,watching me, but what I remember is that suddenly his hand reached over,swept all my figures off the blackboard and wrote one brief equation. Andthen I noticed him! Then I screamed—because it wasn't the full answer to themotor, but it was the way to it, a way I hadn't seen, hadn't suspected, but Iknew where it led! I remember I cried, 'How could you know it?'—and heanswered, pointing at a photograph of your motor, 'I'm the man who made it inthe first place.' And that's the last I remember, Miss Taggart—I mean, the

last I remember of my own existence, because after that we talked aboutstatic electricity and the conversion of energy and the motor.""We talked physics all the way down here," said Gait.

"Oh, I remember when you asked me whether I'd go with you," said Daniels,"whether I'd be willing to go and never come back and give up everything . .. Everything? Give up a dead Institute that's crumbling back into the jungle,give up my future as a janitor-slave-by-law, give up Wesley Mouch andDirective 10-289 and sub-animal creatures who crawl on their bellies,grunting that there is no mind! . . . Miss Taggart"—he laughed exultantly—"hewas asking me whether I'd give that up to go with him! He had to ask ittwice, I couldn't believe it at first, I couldn't believe that any humanbeing would need to be asked or would think of it as a choice. To go? I wouldhave leaped off a skyscraper just to follow him—and to hear his formulabefore we hit the pavement!"

"I don't blame you," she said; she looked at him with a tinge ofwistfulness that was almost envy. "Besides, you've fulfilled your contract.You've led me to the secret of the motor."

"I'm going to be a janitor here, too," said Daniels, grinning happily.

"Mr. Mulligan said he'd give me the job of janitor—at the power plant.

And when I learn, I'll rise to electrician. Isn't he great—Midas Mulligan?That's what I want to be when I reach his age. I want to make money. I wantto make millions. I want to make as much as he did!"

"Daniels!" She laughed, remembering the quiet self-control, the strictprecision, the stern logic of the young scientist she had known. "What's thematter with you? Where are you? Do you know what you're saying?"

"I'm here, Miss Taggart—and there's no limit to what's possible here!

I'm going to be the greatest electrician in the world and the richest! I'mgoing to—"

"You're going to go back to Mulligan's house," said Gait, "and sleep fortwenty-four hours—or I won't let you near the power plant.""Yes, sir," said Daniels meekly.

The sun had trickled down the peaks and drawn a circle of shining graniteand glittering snow to enclose the valley—when they stepped out of the house.She felt suddenly as if nothing existed beyond that circle, and she wonderedat the joyous, proud comfort to be found in a sense of the finite, in theknowledge that the field of one's concern lay within the realm of one'ssight. She wanted to stretch out her arms over the roofs of the town below,feeling that her fingertips would touch the peaks across. But she could notraise her arms; leaning on a cane with one hand and on Gait's arm with theother, moving her feet by a slow, conscientious effort, she walked down tothe car like a child learning to walk for the first time.

She sat by Gait's side as he drove, skirting the town, to Midas Mulligan'shouse. It stood on a ridge, the largest house of the valley, the only onebuilt two stories high, an odd combination of fortress and pleasure resort,with stout granite walls and broad, open terraces. He stopped to let Danielsoff, then drove on up a winding road rising slowly into the mountains.

It was the thought of Mulligan's wealth, the luxurious car and the sightof Gait's hands on the wheel that made her wonder for the first time whetherGait, too, was wealthy. She glanced at his clothes: the gray slacks and whiteshirt seemed of a quality intended for long wear; the leather of the narrowbelt about his waistline was cracked; the watch on his wrist was a precisioninstrument, but made of plain stainless steel. The sole suggestion of luxurywas the color of his hair—the strands stirring in the wind like liquid goldand copper.

Abruptly, behind a turn of the road, she saw the green acres of pasturesstretching to a distant farmhouse. There were herds of sheep, some horses,the fenced squares of pigpens under the sprawling shapes of wooden barns and,

farther away, a metal hangar of a type that did not belong on a farm, A manin a bright cowboy shirt was hurrying toward them. Gait stopped the car andwaved to him, but said nothing in answer to her questioning glance. He lether discover for herself, when the man came closer, that it was DwightSanders, "Hello, Miss Taggart, " he said, smiling.

She looked silently at his rolled shirt sleeves, at his heavy boots, atthe herds of cattle. "So that's all that's left of Sanders Aircraft," shesaid.

"Why, no. There's that excellent monoplane, my best model, which youflattened up in the foothills."

"Oh, you know about that? Yes, it was one of yours. It was a wonderfulship. But I'm afraid I've damaged it pretty badly."

"You ought to have it fixed."

"I think I've ripped the bottom. Nobody can fix it.""I can."

These were the words and the tone of confidence that she had not heard foryears, this was the manner she had given up expecting—but the start of hersmile ended in a bitter chuckle. "How?" she asked. "On a hog farm?"

"Why, no. At Sanders Aircraft."

"Where is it?"

"Where did you think it was? In that building in New Jersey, which TinkyHolloway's cousin bought from my bankrupt successors by means of a governmentloan and a tax suspension? In that building where he produced six planes thatnever left the ground and eight that did, but crashed with forty passengerseach?"

"Where is it, then?"

"Wherever I am."

He pointed across the road. Glancing down through the tops of the pinetrees, she saw the concrete rectangle of an airfield on the bottom of thevalley.

"We have a few planes here and it's my job to take care of them,"

he said. "I'm the hog farmer and the airfield attendant. I'm doing quite

well at producing ham and bacon, without the men from whom I used to buy it.

But those men cannot produce airplanes without me—and, without me, they

cannot even produce their ham and bacon,"

"But you—you have not been designing airplanes, either."

"No, I haven't. And I haven't been manufacturing the Diesel engines I oncepromised you. Since the time I saw you last, I have designed and manufacturedjust one new tractor. I mean, one—I tooled it by hand—no mass production wasnecessary. But that tractor has cut an eight-hour workday down to four hourson"—the straight line of his arm, extended to point across the valley, movedlike a royal scepter; her eyes followed it and she saw the terraced green ofhanging gardens on a distant mountainside—"the chicken and dairy farm ofJudge Narragansett"—his arm moved slowly to a long, flat stretch of greenishgold at the foot of a canyon, then to a band of violent green—"in the wheatfields and tobacco patch of Midas Mulligan"—his arm rose to a granite flankstriped by glistening tiers of leaves—"in the orchards of Richard Halley."

Her eyes went slowly over the curve his arm had traveled, over and overagain, long after the arm had dropped; but she said only, "I see."

"Now do you believe that I can fix your plane?" he asked.

"Yes. But have you seen it?"

"Sure. Midas called two doctors immediately—Hendricks for you, and me foryour plane. It can be fixed. But it will be an expensive job.""How much?"

"Two hundred dollars."

"Two hundred dollars?" she repeated incredulously; the price seemed muchtoo low.

"In gold, Miss Taggart."

"Oh . . . ! Well, where can I buy the gold?""You can't," said Gait.

She jerked her head to face him defiantly. "No?""No. Not where you come from. Your laws forbid it.""Yours don't?""No. "

"Then sell it to me. Choose your own rate of exchange. Name any sum youwant—in my money."

"What money? You're penniless, Miss Taggart."

"What?" It was a word that a Taggart heiress could not ever expect tohear.

"You're penniless in this valley. You own millions of dollars in TaggartTranscontinental stock—but it will not buy one pound of bacon from theSanders hog farm."

"1 see."

Gait smiled and turned to Sanders. "Go ahead and fix that plane.Miss Taggart will pay for it eventually."

He pressed the starter and drove on, while she sat stiffly straight,asking no questions.

A stretch of violent turquoise blue split the cliffs ahead, ending theroad; it took her a second to realize that it was a lake. The motionlesswater seemed to condense the blue of the sky and the green of the pine-covered mountains into so brilliantly pure a color that it made the sky looka dimmed pale gray. A streak of boiling foam came from among the pines andwent crashing down the rocky steps to vanish in the placid water. A smallgranite structure stood by the stream.

Gait stopped the car just as a husky man in overalls stepped out to thethreshold of the open doorway. It was Dick McNamara, who had once been herbest contractor.

"Good day, Miss Taggart!" he said happily. "I'm glad to see that youweren't hurt badly."

She inclined her head in silent greeting—it was like a greeting to theloss and the pain of the past, to a desolate evening and the desperate faceof Eddie Willers telling her the news of this man's disappearance-hurt badly? she thought—I was, but not in the plane crash—on that evening,in an empty office. . . . Aloud, she asked, "What are you doing here? Whatwas it that you betrayed me for, at the worst time possible?"

He smiled, pointing at the stone structure and down at the rocky dropwhere the tube of a water main went vanishing into the underbrush. "I'm theutilities man," he said. "I take care of the water lines, the power lines andthe telephone service.""Alone?"

"Used to. But we've grown so much in the past year that I've had to hirethree men to help me."

"What men? From where?"

"Well, one of them is a professor of economics who couldn't get a joboutside, because he taught that you can't consume more than you haveproduced—one is a professor of history who couldn't get a job because hetaught that the inhabitants of slums were not the men who made this country—and one is a professor of psychology who couldn't get a job because he taughtthat men are capable of thinking."

"They work for you as plumbers and linesmen?"

"You'd be surprised how good they are at it."

"And to whom have they abandoned our colleges?"

"To those who're wanted there." He chuckled, "How long ago was it that Ibetrayed you, Miss Taggart? Not quite three years ago, wasn't it? it's the

John Gait Line that I refused to build for you. Where is your Line now? Butmy lines have grown, in that time, from the couple of miles that Mulligan hadbuilt when I took over, to hundreds of miles of pipe and wire, all within thespace of this valley."

He saw the swift, involuntary look of eagerness on her face, the look of acompetent person's appreciation; he smiled, glanced at her companion and saidsoftly, "You know, Miss Taggart, when it comes to the John Gait Line—maybeit's I who've followed it and you who're betraying it."

She glanced at Gait. He was watching her face, but she could read nothingin his.

As they drove on along the edge of the lake, she asked, "You've mappedthis route deliberately, haven't you? You're showing me all the men whom"—shestopped, feeling inexplicably reluctant to say it, and said, instead—"whom Ihave lost?"

"I'm showing you all the men whom I have taken away from you,"he answered firmly.

This was the root, she thought, of the guiltlessness of his face: he hadguessed and named the words she had wanted to spare him, he had rejected agood will that was not based on his values—and in proud certainty of beingright, he had made a boast of that which she had intended as an accusation.

Ahead of them, she saw a wooden pier projecting into the water of thelake. A young woman lay stretched on the sun-flooded planks, watching abattery of fishing rods. She glanced up at the sound of the car, then leapedto her feet in a single swift movement, a shade too swift, and ran to theroad. She wore slacks, rolled above the knees of her bare legs, she had dark,disheveled hair and large eyes. Gait waved to her.

"Hello, John! When did you get in?" she called.

"This morning," he answered, smiling and driving on.

Dagny jerked her head to look back and saw the glance with which the youngwoman stood looking after Gait. And even though hopelessness, serenelyaccepted, was part of the worship in that glance, she experienced a feelingshe had never known before: a stab of jealousy.

"Who is that?" she asked.

"Our best fishwife. She provides the fish for Hammond's grocery market.""What else is she?"

"You've noticed that there's a 'what else' for every one of us here?

She's a writer. The kind of writer who wouldn't be published outside.

She believes that when one deals with words, one deals with the mind."

The car turned into a narrow path, climbing steeply into a wilderness ofbrush and pine trees. She knew what to expect when she saw a handmade signnailed to a tree, with an arrow pointing the way: The Buena Esperanza Pass.

It was not a pass, it was a wall of laminated rock with a complex chain ofpipes, pumps and valves climbing like a vine up its narrow ledges, but itbore, on its crest, a huge wooden sign—and the proud violence of the lettersannouncing their message to an impassable tangle of ferns and pine branches,was more characteristic, more familiar than the words: Wyatt Oil.

It was oil that ran in a glittering curve from the mouth of a pipe into atank at the foot of the wall, as the only confession of the tremendous secretstruggle inside the stone, as the unobtrusive purpose of all the intricatemachinery—but the machinery did not resemble the installations of an oilderrick, and she knew that she was looking at the unborn secret of the BuenaEsperanza Pass, she knew that this was oil drawn out of shale by some methodmen had considered impossible.

Ellis Wyatt stood on a ridge, watching the glass dial of a gauge imbeddedin the rock. He saw the car stopping below, and called, "Hi, Dagny! Be withyou in a minute!"

There were two other men working with him: a big, muscular roughneck, at apump halfway up the wall, and a young boy, by the tank on the ground. Theyoung boy had blond hair and a face with an unusual purity of form. She feltcertain that she knew this face, but she could not recall where she had seenit. The boy caught her puzzled glance, grinned and, as if to help her,whistled softly, almost inaudibly the first notes of Halley's Fifth Concerto.It was the young brakeman of the Comet.

She laughed. "It was the Fifth Concerto by Richard Halley, wasn't it?"

"Sure," he answered. "But do you think I'd tell that to a scab?"

"A what?"

"What am I paying you for?" asked Ellis Wyatt, approaching; the boychuckled, darting back to seize the lever he had abandoned for a moment."It's Miss Taggart who couldn't fire you, if you loafed on the job. lean."

"That's one of the reasons why I quit the railroad, Miss Taggart,"

said the boy.

"Did you know that I stole him from you?" said Wyatt. "He used to be yourbest brakeman and now he's my best grease-monkey, but neither one of us isgoing to hold him permanently."

"Who is?"

"Richard Halley. Music. He's Halley's best pupil."

She smiled, "I know, this is a place where one employs nothing butaristocrats for the lousiest kinds of jobs."

"They're all aristocrats, that's true," said Wyatt, "because they knowthat there's no such thing as a lousy job—only lousy men who don't care to doit. "

The roughneck was watching them from above, listening with curiosity. Sheglanced up at him, he looked like a truck driver, so she asked, "What wereyou outside? A professor of comparative philology, I suppose?"

"No, ma'am," he answered. "I was a truck driver." He added, "But that'snot what I wanted to remain."

Ellis Wyatt was looking at the place around them with a kind of youthfulpride eager for acknowledgment: it was the pride of a host at a formalreception in a drawing room, and the eagerness of an artist at the opening ofhis show in a gallery. She smiled and asked, pointing at the machinery,"Shale oil?"

"Uh-huh."

"That's the process which you were working to develop while you were onearth?" She said it involuntarily and she gasped a little at her own words.He laughed. "While I was in hell—yes. I'm on earth now.""How much do you produce?""Two hundred barrels a day."

A note of sadness came back into her voice: "It's the process by which youonce intended to fill five tank-trains a day."

"Dagny, " he said earnestly, pointing at his tank, "one gallon of it isworth more than a trainful back there in hell—because this is mine, all ofit, every single drop of it, to be spent on nothing but myself." He raisedhis smudged hand, displaying the greasy stains as a treasure, and a blackdrop on the tip of his finger flashed like a gem in the sun.

"Mine," he said. "Have you let them beat you into forgetting what thatword means, what it feels like? You should give yourself a chance to relearnit. "

"You're hidden in a hole in the wilderness," she said bleakly, "and you'reproducing two hundred barrels of oil, when you could have flooded the worldwith it."

"What for? To feed the looters?"

"No! To earn the fortune you deserve."

"But I'm richer now than I was in the world. What's wealth but the meansof expanding one's life? There's two ways one can do it: either by producingmore or by producing it faster. And that's what I'm doing: I'm manufacturingtime."

"What do you mean?"

"I'm producing everything I need, I'm working to improve my methods, andevery hour I save is an hour added to my life. It used to take me five hoursto fill that tank. It now takes three. The two I saved are mine—aspricelessly mine as if I moved my grave two further hours away for every fiveI've got. It's two hours released from one task, to be invested in another—two more hours in which to work, to grow, to move forward. That's the savingsaccount I'm -hoarding. Is there any sort of safety vault that could protectthis account in the outside world?"

"But what space do you have for moving forward? Where's your market?"

He chuckled. "Market? I now work for use, not for profit—my use, not thelooters' profit. Only those who add to my life, not those who devour it, aremy market. Only those who produce, not those who consume, can ever beanybody's market. I deal with the life-givers, not with the cannibals. If myoil takes less effort to produce, I ask less of the men to whom I trade itfor the things I need. I add an extra span of time to their lives with everygallon of my oil that they burn. And since they're men like me, they keepinventing faster ways to make the things they make—so every one of themgrants me an added minute, hour or day with the bread I buy from them, withthe clothes, the lumber, the metal"—he glanced at Gait—"an added year withevery month of electricity I purchase. That's our market and that's how itworks for us—but that was not the way it worked in the outer world. Down whatdrain were they poured out there, our days, our lives and our energy?

Into what bottomless, futureless sewer of the unpaid-for? Here, we tradeachievements, not failures—values, not needs. We're free of one another, yetwe all grow together. Wealth, Dagny? What greater wealth is there than to ownyour Me and to spend it on growing?

Every living thing must grow. It can't stand still. It must grow orperish.

Look—" He pointed at a plant fighting upward from under the weight of arock—a long, gnarled stem, contorted by an unnatural struggle, with drooping,yellow remnants of unformed leaves and a single green shoot thrust upward tothe sun with the desperation of a last, spent, inadequate effort. "That'swhat they're doing to us back there in hell.

Do you see me submitting to it?"

"No," she whispered.

"Do you see him submitting?" He pointed at Gait."God, no!"

"Then don't be astonished by anything you see in this valley."

She remained silent when they drove on. Gait said nothing.

On a distant mountainside, in the dense green of a forest, she saw a.

pine tree slanting down suddenly, tracing a curve, like the hand of aclock, then crashing abruptly out of sight. She knew that it was a manmademotion.

"Who's the lumberjack around here?" she asked."Ted Nielsen."

The road was relaxing into wider curves and gentler grades, among thesofter shapes of hillsides. She saw a rust-brown slope patched by two squaresof unmatching green: the dark, dusty green of potato plants, and the pale,greenish-silver of cabbages, A man in a red shirt was riding a small tractor,cutting weeds, "Who's the cabbage tycoon?" she asked.

"Roger Marsh."

She closed her eyes. She thought of the weeds that were climbing up thesteps of a closed factory, over its lustrous tile front, a few hundred milesaway, beyond the mountains.

The road was descending to the bottom of the valley. She saw the roofs ofthe town straight below, and the small, shining spot of the dollar sign inthe distance at the other end. Gait stopped the car in front of the firststructure on a ledge above the roofs, a brick building with a faint tinge ofred trembling over its smokestack. It almost shocked her to see so logical asign as "Stockton Foundry" above its door.

When she walked, leaning on her cane, out of the sunlight into the dankgloom of the building, the shock she felt was part sense of anachronism, parthomesickness. This was the industrial East which, in the last few hours, hadseemed to be centuries behind her. This was the old, the familiar, the lovedsight of reddish billows rising to steel rafters, of sparks shooting insunbursts from invisible sources, of sudden flames streaking through a blackfog, of sand molds glowing with white metal. The fog hid the walls of thestructure, dissolving its size—

and for a moment, this was the great, dead foundry at Stockton, Colorado,it was Nielsen Motors ... it was Rearden Steel.

"Hi, Dagny!"

The smiling face that approached her out of the fog was Andrew Stockton's,and she saw a grimy hand extended to her with a gesture of confident pride,as if it held all of her moment's vision on its palm.

She clasped the hand. "Hello," she said softly, not knowing whether shewas greeting the past or the future. Then she shook her head and added, "Howcome you're not planting potatoes or making shoes around here? You'veactually remained in your own profession."

"Oh, Calvin Atwood of the Atwood Light and Power Company of New York Cityis making the shoes. Besides, my profession is one of the oldest and mostimmediately needed anywhere. Still, I had to fight for it. I had to ruin acompetitor, first."

"What?"

He grinned and pointed to the glass door of a sun-flooded room."There's my ruined competitor," he said.

She saw a young man bent over a long table, working on a complex model forthe mold of a drill head. He had the slender, powerful hands of a concertpianist and the grim face of a surgeon concentrating on his task.

"He's a sculptor," said Stockton. "When I came here, he and his partnerhad a sort of combination hand-forge and repair shop. I opened a realfoundry, and took all their customers away from them. The boy couldn't do thekind of job I did, it was only a part-time business for him, anyway—sculptureis his real business—so he came to work for me. He's making more money now,in shorter hours, than he used to make in his own foundry. His partner was achemist, so he went into agriculture and he's produced a chemical fertilizerthat's doubled some of the crops around here—did you mention potatoes?—potatoes, in particular."

"Then somebody could put you out of business, too?"

"Sure. Any time. I know one man who could and probably will, when he getshere. But, boy!—I'd work for him as a cinder sweeper. He'd blast through thisvalley like a rocket. He'd triple everybody's production."

"Who's that?"

"Hank Rearden."

"Yes . . ." she whispered, "Oh yes!"

She wondered what had made her say it with such immediate certainty. Shefelt, simultaneously, that Hank Rearden's presence in this valley wasimpossible—and that this was his place, peculiarly his, this was the place ofhis youth, of his start, and, together, the place he had been seeking all his

life, the land he had struggled to reach, the goal of his tortured battle. .. . It seemed to her that the spirals of flame tinged fog were drawing timeinto an odd circle—and while a dim thought went floating through her mindlike the streamer of an unfollowed sentence: To hold an unchanging youth isto reach, at the end, the vision with which one started—she heard the voiceof a tramp in a diner, saying, "John Gait found the fountain of youth whichhe wanted to bring down to men. Only he never came back . . . because hefound that it couldn't be brought down."

A sheaf of sparks went up in the depth of the fog—and she saw the broadback of a foreman whose arm made the sweeping gesture of a signal, directingsome invisible task. He jerked his head to snap an order—she caught a glimpseof his profile—and she caught her breath.

Stockton saw it, chuckled and called into the fog: "Hey, Ken! Come here!Here's an old friend of yours!"

She looked at Ken Danagger as he approached them. The great industrialist,whom she had tried so desperately to hold to his desk, was now dressed insmudged overalls.

"Hello, Miss Taggart. I told you we'd soon meet again."

Her head dropped, as if in assent and in greeting, but her hand bore downheavily upon her cane, for a moment, while she stood reliving their lastencounter: the tortured hour of waiting, then the gently distant face at thedesk and the tinkling of a glass-paneled door closing upon a stranger.

It was so brief a moment that two of the men before her could take it onlyas a greeting—but it was at Gait that she looked when she raised her head,and she saw him looking at her as if he knew what she felt—she saw him seeingin her face the realization that it was he who had walked out of Danagger'soffice, that day. His face gave her nothing in answer: it had that look ofrespectful severity with which a man stands before the fact that the truth isthe truth.

"I didn't expect it," she said softly, to Danagger. "I never expected tosee you again."

Danagger was watching her as if she were a promising child he had oncediscovered and was now affectionately amused to watch. "I know," he said."But why are you so shocked?"

"I . . . oh, it's just that it's preposterous!" She pointed at hisclothes.

"What's wrong with it?"

"Is this, then, the end of your road?"

"Hell, no! The beginning."

"What are you aiming at?"

"Mining. Not coal, though. Iron."

"Where?"

He pointed toward the mountains. "Right here. Did you ever know MidasMulligan to make a bad investment? You'd be surprised what one can find inthat stretch of rock, if one knows how to look. That's what I've been doing-looking . "

"And if you don't find any iron ore?"

He shrugged. "There's other things to do. I've always been short on timein my life, never on what to use it for."

She glanced at Stockton with curiosity. "Aren't you training a man whocould become your most dangerous competitor?"

"That's the only sort of men I like to hire. Dagny, have you lived toolong among the looters? Have you come to think that one man's ability is athreat to another?"

"Oh no! But I thought I was almost the only one left who didn't thinkthat."

"Any man who's afraid of hiring the best ability he can find, is a cheatwho's in a business where he doesn't belong. To me—the foulest man on earth,more contemptible than a criminal, is the employer who rejects men for beingtoo good. That's what I've always thought and—

say, what are you laughing at?"

She was listening to him with an eager, incredulous smile. "It's sostartling to hear," she said, "because it's so right!""What else can one think?"

She chuckled softly. "You know, when I was a child, I expected everybusinessman to think it.""And since then?"

"Since then, I've learned not to expect it.""But it's right, isn't it?""I've learned not to expect the right.""But it stands to reason, doesn't it?""I've given up expecting reason."

"That's what one must never give up," said Ken Danagger.

They had returned to the car and had started down the last, descendingcurves of the road, when she glanced at Gait and he turned to her at once, asif he had expected it.

"It was you in Danagger's office that day, wasn't it?" she asked.

"Yes."

"Did you know, then, that I was waiting outside?""Yes."

"Did you know what it was like, to wait behind that closed door?"

She could not name the nature of the glance with which he looked at her.It was not pity, because she did not seem to be its object; it was the kindof glance with which one looks at suffering, but it was not her sufferingthat he seemed to be seeing.

"Oh yes," he answered quietly, almost lightly.

The first shop to rise by the side of the valley's single street was likethe sudden sight of an open theater: a frame box without front wall, itsstage set in the bright colors of a musical comedy—with red cubes, greencircles, gold triangles, which were bins of tomatoes, barrels of lettuce,pyramids of oranges, and a spangled backdrop where the sun hit shelves ofmetal containers. The name on the marquee said; Hammond Grocery Market. Adistinguished man in shirt sleeves, with a stern profile and gray temples,was weighing a chunk of butter for an attractive young woman who stood at thecounter, her posture light as a show girl's, the skirt of her cotton dressswelling faintly in the wind, like a dance costume. Dagny smiledinvoluntarily, even though the man was Lawrence Hammond.

The shops were small one-story structures, and as they moved past her, shecaught familiar names on their signs, like headings on the pages of a bookriffled by the car's motion: Mulligan General Store—Atwood Leather Goods-Nielsen Lumber—then the sign of the dollar above the door of a small brickfactory with the inscription: Mulligan Tobacco Company. "Who's the Company,besides Midas Mulligan?" she asked. "Dr. Akston," he answered.

There were few passers-by, some men, fewer women, and they walked withpurposeful swiftness, as if bound on specific errands. One after another,they stopped at the sight of the car, they waved to Gait and they looked ather with the unastonished curiosity of recognition.

"Have I been expected here for a long time?" she asked, "You still are,"he answered.

On the edge of the road, she saw a structure made of glass sheets heldtogether by a wooden framework, but for one instant it seemed to her that itwas only a frame for the painting of a woman—a tall, fragile woman with paleblond hair and a face of such beauty that it seemed veiled by distance, as if

the artist had been merely able to suggest it, not to make it quite real. Inthe next instant the woman moved her head—and Dagny realized that there werepeople at the tables inside the structure, that it was a cafeteria, that thewoman stood behind the counter, and that she was Kay Ludlow, the movie starwho, once seen, could never be forgotten; the star who had retired andvanished five years ago, to be replaced by girls of indistinguishable namesand interchangeable faces. But at the shock of the realization, Dagny thoughtof the sort of movies that were now being made—and then she felt that theglass cafeteria was a cleaner use for Kay Ludlow's beauty than a role in apicture glorifying the commonplace for possessing no glory.

The building that came next was a small, squat block of rough granite,sturdy, solid, neatly built, the lines of its rectangular bulk as severelyprecise as the creases of a formal garment—but she saw, like an instant'sghost, the long streak of a skyscraper rising into the coils of Chicago'sfog, the skyscraper that had once borne the sign she now saw written in goldletters above a modest pine-wood door: Mulligan Bank.

Gait slowed the car while moving past the bank, as if placing the motionin some special italics.

A small brick structure came next, bearing the sign: Mulligan Mint.

"A mint?" she asked. "What's Mulligan doing with a mint?" Gait reachedinto his pocket and dropped two small coins into the palm of her hand. Theywere miniature disks of shining gold, smaller than pennies, the kind that hadnot been in circulation since the days of Nat Taggart; they bore the head ofthe Statue of Liberty on one side, the words "United States of America—OneDollar" on the other, but the dates stamped upon them were of the past twoyears.

"That's the money we use here," he said. "It's minted by Midas Mulligan.""But ... on whose authority?"

"That's stated on the coin—on both sides of it.""What do you use for small change?"

"Mulligan mints that, too, in silver. We don't accept any other currencyin this valley. We accept nothing but objective values."

She was studying the coins. "This looks like . . . like something from thefirst morning in the age of my ancestors."

He pointed at the valley, "Yes, doesn't it?"

She sat looking at the two thin, delicate, almost weightless drops of goldin the palm of her hand, knowing that the whole of the TaggartTranscontinental system had rested upon them, that this had been the keystonesupporting all the keystones, all the arches, all the girders of the Taggarttrack, the Taggart Bridge, the Taggart Building. . . . She shook her head andslipped the coins back into his hand.

"You're not making it easier for me," she said, her voice low.

"I'm making it as hard as possible."

"Why don't you say it? Why don't you tell me all the things you want me tolearn?"

The gesture of his arm pointed at the town, at the road behind them."What have I been doing?" he asked.

They drove on in silence. After a while, she asked, in the tone of a drylystatistical inquiry, "How much of a fortune has Midas Mulligan amassed inthis valley?"

He pointed ahead. "Judge for yourself."

The road was winding through stretches of unleveled soil toward the homesof the valley. The homes were not lined along a street, they were spread atirregular intervals over the rises and hollows of the ground, they were smalland simple, built of local materials, mostly of granite and pine, with aprodigal ingenuity of thought and a tight economy of physical effort. Everyhouse looked as if it had been put up by the labor of one man, no two houses

were alike, and the only quality they had in common was the stamp of a mindgrasping a problem and solving it. Gait pointed out a house, once in a while,choosing the names she knew—and it sounded to her like a list of quotationsfrom the richest stock exchange in the world, or like a roll call of honor:"Ken Danagger . . . Ted Nielsen . . . Lawrence Hammond . . . Roger Marsh . .. Ellis Wyatt . . . Owen Kellogg . . . Dr. Akston."

The home of Dr. Akston was the last, a small cottage with a large terrace,lifted on the crest of a wave against the rising walls of the mountains. Theroad went past it and climbed on into the coils of an ascending grade. Thepavement shrank to a narrow path between two walls of ancient pines, theirtall, straight trunks pressing against it like a grim colonnade, theirbranches meeting above, swallowing the path into sudden silence and twilight.There were no marks of wheels on the thin strip of earth, it looked unusedand forgotten, a few minutes and a few turns seemed to take the car milesaway from human habitation—

and then there was nothing to break the pressure of the stillness but arare wedge of sunlight cutting across the trunks in the depth of the forestonce in a while.

The sudden sight of a house on the edge of the path struck her like theshock of an unexpected sound: built in loneliness, cut off from all ties tohuman existence, it looked like the secret retreat of some great defiance orsorrow. It was the humblest home of the valley, a log cabin beaten in darkstreaks by the tears of many rains, only its great windows withstanding thestorms with the smooth, shining, untouched serenity of glass.

"Whose house is . . . Oh!"—she caught her breath and jerked her head away.Above the door, hit by a ray of sun, its design blurred and worn, batteredsmooth by the winds of centuries, hung the silver coat of-arms of Sebastiand'Anconia.

As if in deliberate answer to her involuntary movement of escape, Gaitstopped the car in front of the house. For a moment, they held each other'seyes: her glance was a question, his a command, her face had a defiantfrankness, his an unrevealing severity; she understood his purpose, but nothis motive. She obeyed. Leaning on her cane, she stepped out of the car, thenstood erect, facing the house.

She looked at the silver crest that had come from a marble palace in Spainto a shack in the Andes to a log cabin in Colorado—the crest of the men whowould not submit. The door of the cabin was locked, the sun did not reachinto the glazed darkness beyond the windows, and pine branches hungoutstretched above the roof like arms spread in protection, in compassion, insolemn blessing. With no sound but the snap of a twig or the ring of a dropfalling somewhere in the forest through long stretches of moments, thesilence seemed to hold all the pain that had been hidden here, but nevergiven voice. She stood, listening with a gentle, resigned, unlamentingrespect: Let's see who'll do greater honor, you—to Nat Taggart, or I—toSebastian d'Anconia. . . .

Dagny! Help me to remain. To refuse. Even though he's right! . . .

She turned to look at Gait, knowing that he was the man against whom shehad had no help to offer. He sat at the wheel of the car, he had not followedher or moved to assist her, as if he had wanted her to acknowledge the pastand had respected the privacy of her lonely salute. She noticed that he stillsat as she had left him, his forearm leaning against the wheel at the sameangle, the fingers of his hand hanging down in the same sculptured position.His eyes were watching her, but that was all she could read in his face: thathe had watched her intently, without moving.

When she was seated beside him once more, he said, "That was the first manI took away from you."

She asked, her face stern, open and quietly defiant, "How much do you knowabout that?"

"Nothing that he told me in words. Everything that the tone of his voicetold me whenever he spoke of you."

She inclined her head. She had caught the sound of suffering in thefaintest exaggeration of evenness in his voice.

He pressed the starter, the motor's explosion blasted the story containedin the silence, and they drove on., The path widened a little, streamingtoward a pool of sunlight ahead.

She saw a brief glitter of wires among the branches, as they drove outinto a clearing. An unobtrusive little structure stood against a hillside, ona rising slant of rocky ground. It was a simple cube of granite, the size ofa toolshed, it had no windows, no apertures of any kind, only a door ofpolished steel and a complex set of wire antennae branching out from theroof. Gait was driving past, leaving it unnoticed, when she asked with asudden start, "What's that?"

She saw the faint break of his smile. "The powerhouse."

"Oh, stop, please!"

He obeyed, backing the car to the foot of the hillside. It was her firstfew steps up the rocky incline that stopped her, as if there were no need tomove forward, no further place to rise—and she stood as in the moment whenshe had opened her eyes on the earth of the valley, a moment uniting herbeginning to her goal.

She stood looking up at the structure, her consciousness surrendered to asingle sight and a single, wordless emotion—but she had always known that anemotion was a sum totaled by an adding machine of the mind, and what she nowfelt was the instantaneous total of the thoughts she did not have to name,the final sum of a long progression, like a voice telling her by means of afeeling: If she had held onto Ouentin Daniels, with no hope of a chance touse the motor, for the sole sake of knowing that achievement had not died onearth—if, like a weighted diver sinking in an ocean of mediocrity, under thepressure of men with gelatin eyes, rubber voices, spiral-shaped convictions,noncommittal souls and non-committing hands, she had held, as her life lineand oxygen tube, the thought of a superlative achievement of the human mind—if, at the sight of the motor's remnant, in a sudden gasp of suffocation, asa last protest from his corruption-eaten lungs, Dr.

Stadler had cried for something, not to look down at, but up to, and thishad been the cry, the longing and the fuel of her life—if she had moved,drawn by the hunger of her youth for a sight of clean, hard, radiantcompetence—then here it was before her, reached and done, the power of anincomparable mind given shape in a net of wires sparkling peacefully under asummer sky, drawing an incalculable power out of space into the secretinterior of a small stone hovel.

She thought of this structure, half the size of a boxcar, replacing thepower plants of the country, the enormous conglomerations of steel, fuel andeffort—she thought of the current flowing from this structure, liftingounces, pounds, tons of strain from the shoulders of those who would make itor use it, adding hours, days and years of liberated time to their lives, beit an extra moment to lift one's head from one's task and glance at thesunlight, or an extra pack of cigarettes bought with the money saved fromone's electric bill, or an hour cut from the workday of every factory usingpower, or a month's journey through the whole, open width of the world, on aticket paid for by one day of one's labor, on a train pulled by the power ofthis motor—with all the energy of that weight, that strain, that timereplaced and paid for by the energy of a single mind who had known how tomake connections of wire follow the connections of his thought. But she knewthat there was no meaning in motors or factories or trains, that their only

meaning was in man's enjoyment of his life, which they served—and that herswelling admiration at the sight of an achievement was for the man from whomit came, for the power and the radiant vision within him which had seen theearth as a place of enjoyment and had known that the work of achieving one'shappiness was the purpose, the sanction and the meaning of life.

The door of the structure was a straight, smooth sheet of stainless steel,softly lustrous and bluish in the sun. Above it, cut in the granite, as theonly feature of the building's rectangular austerity, there stood aninscription: I SWEAR BY MY LIFE AND MY LOVE OF IT THAT I WILL NEVER LIVE FORTHE SAKE OF ANOTHER

MAN, NOR ASK ANOTHER MAN TO LIVE FOR MINE.

She turned to Gait. He stood beside her; he had followed her, he had knownthat this salute was his. She was looking at the inventor of the motor, butwhat she saw was the easy, casual figure of a workman in his natural settingand function—she noted the uncommon lightness of his posture, a weightlessway of standing that showed an expert control of the use of his body—a tallbody in simple garments: a thin shirt, light slacks, a belt about a slenderwaistline—and loose hair made to glitter like metal by the current of asluggish wind. She looked at him as she had looked at his structure.

Then she knew that the first two sentences they had said to each otherstill hung between them, filling the silence—that everything said since, hadbeen said over the sound of those words, that he had known it, had held it,had not let her forget it. She was suddenly aware that they were alone; itwas an awareness that stressed the fact, permitting no further implication,yet holding the full meaning of the unnamed in that special stress. They werealone in a silent forest, at the foot of a structure that looked like anancient temple—and she knew what rite was the proper form of worship to beoffered on an altar of that kind.

She felt a sudden pressure at the base of her throat, her head leaned backa little, no more than to feel the faint shift of a current against her hair,but it was as if she were lying back in space, against the wind, conscious ofnothing but his legs and the shape of his mouth. He stood watching her, hisface still but for the faint movement of his eyelids drawing narrow as ifagainst too strong a light. It was like the beat of three instants—this wasthe first—and in the next, she felt a stab of ferocious triumph at theknowledge that his effort and his struggle were harder to endure than hers—and, then he moved his eyes and raised his head to look at the inscription onthe temple.

She let him look at it for a moment, almost as an act of condescendingmercy to an adversary struggling to refuel his strength, then she asked, witha note of imperious pride in her voice, pointing at the inscription, "What'sthat?"

"It's the oath that was taken by every person in this valley, but you."She said, looking at the words, "This has always been my own rule ofliving."

"I know it."

"But I don't think that yours is the way to practice it.""Then you'll have to learn which one of us is wrong."

She walked up to the steel door of the structure, with a sudden confidencefaintly stressed in the movements of her body, a mere hint of stress, no morethan her awareness of the power she held by means of his pain—and she tried,asking no permission, to turn the knob of the door. But the door was locked,and she felt no tremor under the pressure of her hand, as if the lock werepoured and sealed to the stone with the solid steel of the sheet.

"Don't try to open that door, Miss Taggart"

He approached her, his steps a shade too slow, as if stressing hisknowledge of her awareness of every step. "No amount of physical force will

do it," he said. "Only a thought can open that door. If you tried to break itdown by means of the best explosives in the world, the machinery inside wouldcollapse into rubble long before the door would give way. But reach thethought which it requires—and the secret of the motor will be yours, as wellas"—it was the first break she had heard in his voice—"as well as any othersecret you might wish to know."

He faced her for a moment, as if leaving himself open to her fullunderstanding, then smiled oddly, quietly at some thought of his own, andadded, "I'll show you how it's done."

He stepped back. Then, standing still, his face raised to the words carvedin the stone, he repeated them slowly, evenly, as if taking that oath oncemore. There was no emotion in his voice, nothing but the spaced clarity ofthe sounds he pronounced with full knowledge of their meaning—but she knewthat she was witnessing the most solemn moment it would ever be given her towitness, she was seeing a man's naked soul and the cost it had paid to utterthese words, she was hearing an echo of the day when he had pronounced thatoath for the first time and with full knowledge of the years ahead—she knewwhat manner of man had stood up to face six thousand others on a dark springnight and why they had been afraid of him, she knew that this was the birthand the core of all the things that had happened to the world in the twelveyears since, she knew that this was of far greater import than the motorhidden inside the structure—she knew it, to the sound of a man's voicepronouncing in self-reminder and rededication: "I swear by my life . . . andmy love of it . . . that I will never live for the sake of another man . . .nor ask another man ... to live . . . for mine."

It did not startle her, it seemed unastonishing and almost unimportant,that at the end of the last sound, she saw the door opening slowly, withouthuman touch, moving inward upon a growing strip of darkness.

In the moment when an electric light went on inside the structure, heseized the knob and pulled the door shut, its lock clicking sealed once more.

"It's a sound lock," he said; his face was serene. "That sentence is thecombination of sounds needed to open it. I don't mind telling you thissecret—because I know that you won't pronounce those words until you meanthem the way I intended them to be meant."

She inclined her head. "I won't."

She followed him down to the car, slowly, feeling suddenly too exhaustedto move. She fell back against the seat, closing her eyes, barely hearing thesound of the starter. The accumulated strain and shock of her sleepless hourshit her at once, breaking through the barrier of the tension her nerves hadheld to delay it. She lay still, unable to think, to react or to struggle,drained of all emotions but one.

She did not speak. She did not open her eyes until the car stopped infront of his house.

"You'd better rest," he said, "and go to sleep right now, if you want toattend Mulligan's dinner tonight."

She nodded obediently. She staggered to the house, avoiding his help. Shemade an effort to tell him, "I'll be all right," then to escape to the safetyof her room and last long enough to close the door.

She collapsed, face down, on the bed. It was not the mere fact of physicalexhaustion. It was the sudden monomania of a sensation too complete toendure. While the strength of her body was gone, while her mind had lost thefaculty of consciousness, a single emotion drew on her remnants of energy, ofunderstanding, of judgment, of control, leaving her nothing to resist it withor to direct it, making her unable to desire, only to feel, reducing her to amere sensation—a static sensation without start or goal. She kept seeing hisfigure in her mind—his figure as he had stood at the door of the structure-she felt nothing else, no wish, no hope, no estimate of her feeling, no name

for it, no relation to herself—there was no entity such as herself, she wasnot a person, only a function, the function of seeing him, and the sight wasits own meaning and purpose, with no further end to reach.

Her face buried in the pillow, she recalled dimly, as a faint sensation,the moment of her take-off from the floodlighted strip of the Kansasairfield. She felt the beat of the engine, the streak of accelerating motiongathering power in a straight-line run to a single goal—and in the momentwhen the wheels left the ground, she was asleep.

The floor of the valley was like a pool still reflecting the glow of thesky, but the light was thickening from gold to copper, the shores were fadingand the peaks were smoke-blue—when they drove to Mulligan's house.

There was no trace of exhaustion left in her bearing and no remnant ofviolence. She had awakened at sundown; stepping out of her room, she hadfound Gait waiting, sitting idly motionless in the light of a lamp. He hadglanced up at her; she had stood in the doorway, her face composed, her hairsmooth, her posture relaxed and confident —she had looked as she would havelooked on the threshold of her office in the Taggart Building, but for theslight angle of her body leaning on a cane. He had sat looking at her for amoment, and she had wondered why she had felt certain that this was the imagehe was seeing—he was seeing the doorway of her office, as if it were a sightlong-imagined and long-forbidden.

She sat beside him in the car, feeling no desire to speak, knowing thatneither of them could conceal the meaning of their silence. She watched a fewlights come up in the distant homes of the valley, then the lighted windowsof Mulligan's house on the ledge ahead. She asked, "Who will be there?"

"Some of your last friends," he answered, "and some of my first."

Midas Mulligan met them at the door. She noticed that his grim, squareface was not as harshly expressionless as she had thought: he had a look ofsatisfaction, but satisfaction could not soften his features, it merelystruck them like flint and sent sparks of humor to glitter faintly in thecorners of his eyes, a humor that was shrewder, more demanding, yet warmerthan a smile.

He opened the door of his house, moving his arm a shade more slowly thannormal, giving an imperceptibly solemn emphasis to his gesture.

Walking into the living room, she faced seven men who rose to their feetat her entrance.

"Gentlemen—Taggart Transcontinental," said Midas Mulligan.

He said it smiling, but only half-jesting; some quality in his voice madethe name of the railroad sound as it would have sounded in the days of NatTaggart, as a sonorous title of honor.

She inclined her head, slowly, in acknowledgment to the men before her,knowing that these were the men whose standards of value and honor were thesame as her own, the men who recognized the glory of that title as sherecognized it, knowing with a sudden stab of wistfulness how much she hadlonged for that recognition through all her years.

Her eyes moved slowly, in greeting, from face to face: Ellis Wyatt—Ken Danagger—Hugh Akston—Dr. Hendricks—Quentin Daniels-Mulligan's voice pronounced the names of the two others: "Richard Halley—Judge Narragansett."

The faint smile on Richard Halley's face seemed to tell her that they hadknown each other for years—as, in her lonely evenings by the side of herphonograph, they had. The austerity of Judge Narragansett's white-hairedfigure reminded her that she had once heard him described as a marble statue—a blindfolded marble statue; it was the kind of figure that had vanished fromthe courtrooms of the country when the gold coins had vanished from thecountry's hands.

"You have belonged here for a long time, Miss Taggart, " said MidasMulligan. "This was not the way we expected you to come, but—welcome home."

No!—she wanted to answer, but heard herself answering softly, "Thank you."

"Dagny, how many years is it going to take you to learn to be yourself?"It was Ellis Wyatt, grasping her elbow, leading her to a chair, grinning ather look of helplessness, at the struggle between a smile and a tighteningresistance in her face. "Don't pretend that you don't understand us. You do."

"We never make assertions, Miss Taggart," said Hugh Akston. "That is themoral crime peculiar to our enemies. We do not tell—we show.

We do not claim—we prove. It is not your obedience that we seek to win,but your rational conviction. You have seen all the elements of our secret.The conclusion is now yours to draw—we can help you to name it, but not toaccept it—the sight, the knowledge and the acceptance must be yours."

"I feel as if I know it," she answered simply, "and more: I feel as ifI've always known it, but never found it, and now I'm afraid, not afraid tohear it, just afraid that it's coming so close."

Akston smiled. "What does this look like to you, Miss Taggart?" He pointedaround the room.

"This?" She laughed suddenly, looking at the faces of the men against thegolden sunburst of rays filling the great windows. "This looks like . . . Youknow, I never hoped to see any of you again, I wondered at times how much I'dgive for just one more glimpse or one more word—and now—now this is like thatdream you imagine in childhood, when you think that some day, in heaven, youwill see those great departed whom you had not seen on earth, and you choose,from all the past centuries, the great men you would like to meet."

"Well, that's one clue to the nature of our secret," said Akston.

"Ask yourself whether the dream of heaven and greatness should be leftwaiting for us in our graves—or whether it should be ours here and now and onthis earth."

"I know," she whispered.

"And if you met those great men in heaven," asked Ken Danagger, "whatwould you want to say to them?"

"Just . . . just 'hello,' I guess."

"That's not all," said Danagger. "There's something you'd want to hearfrom them. I didn't know it, either, until I saw him for the first time"—hepointed to Gait—"and he said it to me, and then I knew what it was that I hadmissed all my life. Miss Taggart, you'd want them to look at you and to say,'Well done' " She dropped her head and nodded silently, head down, not to lethim see the sudden spurt of tears to her eyes. "All right, then: Well done,Dagny!—well done—too well—and now it's time for you to rest from that burdenwhich none of us should ever have had to carry."

"Shut up," said Midas Mulligan, looking at her bowed head with anxiousconcern.

But she raised her head, smiling. "Thank you," she said to Danagger."If you talk about resting, then let her rest," said Mulligan. "She's hadtoo much for one day."

"No." She smiled. "Go ahead, say it—whatever it is.""Later," said Mulligan.

It was Mulligan and Akston who served dinner, with Quentin Daniels to helpthem. They served it on small silver trays, to be placed on the arms of thechairs—and they all sat about the room, with the fire of the sky fading inthe windows and sparks of electric light glittering in the wine glasses.There was an air of luxury about the room, but it was the luxury of expertsimplicity; she noted the costly furniture, carefully chosen for comfort,bought somewhere at a time when luxury had still been an art. There were nosuperfluous objects, but she noticed a small canvas by a great master of theRenaissance, worth a fortune, she noticed an Oriental rug of a texture and

color that belonged under glass in a museum. This was Mulligan's concept ofwealth, she thought—the wealth of selection, not of accumulation.

Quentin Daniels sat on the floor, with his tray on his lap; he seemedcompletely at home, and he glanced up at her once in a while, grinning likean impudent kid brother who had beaten her to a secret she had notdiscovered. He had preceded her into the valley by some ten minutes, shethought, but he was one of them, while she was still a stranger.

Gait sat aside, beyond the circle of lamplight, on the arm of Dr.

Akston's chair. He had not said a word, he had stepped back and turned herover to the others, and he sat watching it as a spectacle in which he had nofurther part to play. But her eyes kept coming back to him, drawn by thecertainty that the spectacle was of his choice and staging, that he had setit in motion long ago, and that all the others knew it as she knew it.

She noticed another person who was intensely aware of Gait's presence:Hugh Akston glanced up at him once in a while, involuntarily, almostsurreptitiously, as if struggling not to confess the loneliness of a longseparation. Akston did not speak to him, as if taking his presence forgranted. But once, when Gait bent forward and a strand of hair fell downacross his face, Akston reached over and brushed it back, his hand lingeringfor an imperceptible instant on his pupil's forehead: it was the only breakof emotion he permitted himself, the only greeting; it was the gesture of afather.

She found herself talking to the men around her, relaxing in lightheartedcomfort. No, she thought, what she felt was not strain, it was a dimastonishment at the strain which she should, but did not, feel; theabnormality of it was that it seemed so normal and simple.

She was barely aware of her questions, as she spoke to one man afteranother, but their answers were printing a record in her mind, movingsentence by sentence to a goal.

"The Fifth Concerto?" said Richard Halley, in answer to her question. "Iwrote it ten years ago. We call it the Concerto of Deliverance.

Thank you for recognizing it from a few notes whistled in the night.

. . . Yes, I know about that. . . . Yes, since you knew my work, you wouldknow, when you heard it, that this Concerto said everything I had beenstruggling to say and reach. It's dedicated to him." He pointed to Gait."Why, no, Miss Taggart, I haven't given up music, What makes you think so?I've written more in the last ten years than in any other period of my life.I will play it for you, any of it, when you come to my house. . . . No, MissTaggart, it will not be published outside. Not a note of it will be heardbeyond these mountains."

"No, Miss Taggart, I have not given up medicine," said Dr. Hendricks, inanswer to her question. "I have spent the last six years on research. I havediscovered a method to protect the blood vessels of the brain from that fatalrupture which is known as a brain stroke. It will remove from human existencethe terrible threat of sudden paralysis.

. . . No, not a word of my method will be heard outside."

"The law, Miss Taggart?" said Judge Narragansett. "What law? I did notgive it up—it has ceased to exist. But I am still working in the profession Ihad chosen, which was that of serving the cause of justice.

. . . No, justice has not ceased to exist. How could it? It is possiblefor men to abandon their sight of it, and then it is justice that destroysthem. But it is not possible for justice to go out of existence, because oneis an attribute of the other, because justice is the act of acknowledgingthat which exists. . . . Yes, I am continuing in my profession. I am writinga treatise on the philosophy of law, I shall demonstrate that humanity'sdarkest evil, the most destructive horror machine among all the devices of

men, is non-objective law. . . . No, Miss Taggart, my treatise will not bepublished outside."

"My business, Miss Taggart?" said Midas Mulligan. "My business is bloodtransfusion—and I'm still doing it. My job is to feed a life-fuel into theplants that are capable of growing. But ask Dr. Hendricks whether any amountof blood will save a body that refuses to function, a rotten hulk thatexpects to exist without effort. My blood bank is gold. Gold is a fuel thatwill perform wonders, but no fuel can work where there is no motor. . . . No,I haven't given up. I merely got fed up with the job of running a slaughterhouse, where one drains blood out of healthy living beings and pumps it intogutless half-corpses."

"Given up?" said Hugh Akston. "Check your premises, Miss Taggart.

None of us has given up. It is the world that has. . . . What is wrongwith a philosopher running a roadside diner? Or a cigarette factory, as I amdoing now? All work is an act of philosophy. And when men will learn toconsider productive work—and that which is its source—as the standard oftheir moral values, they will reach that state of perfection which is thebirthright they lost. . . . The source of work? Man's mind, Miss Taggart,man's reasoning mind. I am writing a book on this subject, defining a moralphilosophy that I learned from my own pupil. . . . Yes, it could save theworld. . . . No, it will not be published outside."

"Why?" she cried. "Why? What are you doing, all of you?"

"We are on strike," said John Gait.

They all turned to him, as if they had been waiting for his voice and forthat word. She heard the empty beat of time within her, which was the suddensilence of the room, as she looked at him across a span of lamplight. He satslouched casually on the arm of a chair, leaning forward, his forearm acrosshis knees, his hand hanging down idly—

and it was the faint smile on his face that gave to his words the deadlysound of the irrevocable: "Why should this seem so startling? There is onlyone kind of men who have never been on strike in human history. Every otherkind and class have stopped, when they so wished, and have presented demandsto the world, claiming to be indispensable—except the men who have carriedthe world on their shoulders, have kept it alive, have endured torture assole payment, but have never walked out on the human race.

Well, their turn has come. Let the world discover who they are, what theydo and what happens when they refuse to function. This is the strike of themen of the mind, Miss Taggart. This is the mind on strike."

She did not move, except for the fingers of one hand that moved slowly upher cheek to her temple.

"Through all the ages," he said, "the mind has been regarded as evil, andevery form of insult: from heretic to materialist to exploiter—

every form of iniquity: from exile to disfranchisement to expropriation—every form of torture: from sneers to rack to firing squad-have been brought down upon those who assumed the responsibility oflooking at the world through the eyes of a living consciousness andperforming the crucial act of a rational connection. Yet only to the extentto which—in chains, in dungeons, in hidden corners, in the cells ofphilosophers, in the shops of traders—some men continued to think, only tothat extent was humanity able to survive. Through all the centuries of theworship of the mindless, whatever stagnation humanity chose to endure,whatever brutality to practice—it was only by the grace of the men whoperceived that wheat must have water in order to grow, that stones laid in acurve will form an arch, that two and two make four, that love is not servedby torture and life is not fed by destruction—only by the grace of those mendid the rest of them learn to experience moments when they caught the sparkof being human, and only the sum of such moments permitted them to continue

to exist. It was the man of the mind who taught them to bake their bread, toheal their wounds, to forge their weapons and to build the jails into whichthey threw him. He was the man of extravagant energy—and reckless generosity—who knew that stagnation is not man's fate, that impotence is not his nature,that the ingenuity of his mind is his noblest and most joyous power—and inservice to that love of existence he was alone to feel, he went on working,working at any price, working for his despoilers, for his jailers, for historturers, paying with his life for the privilege of saving theirs. This washis glory and his guilt—that he let them teach him to feel guilty of hisglory, to accept the part of a sacrificial animal and, in punishment for thesin of intelligence, to perish on the altars of the brutes. The tragic jokeof human history is that on any of the altars men erected, it was always manwhom they immolated and the animal whom they enshrined. It was always theanimal's attributes, not man's, that humanity worshipped: the idol ofinstinct and the idol of force—the mystics and the kings—the mystics, wholonged for an irresponsible consciousness and ruled by means of the claimthat their dark emotions were superior to reason, that knowledge came inblind, causeless fits, blindly to be followed, not doubted—and the kings, whoruled by means of claws and muscles, with conquest as their method andlooting as their aim, with a club or a gun as sole sanction of their power.The defenders of man's soul were concerned with his feelings, and thedefenders of man's body were concerned with his stomach—but both were unitedagainst his mind. Yet no one, not the lowest of humans, is ever able fully torenounce his brain. No one has ever believed in the irrational; what they dobelieve in is the unjust.

Whenever a man denounces the mind, it is because his goal is of a naturethe mind would not permit him to confess. When he preaches contradictions, hedoes so in the knowledge that someone will accept the burden of theimpossible, someone will make it work for him at the price of his ownsuffering or life; destruction is the price of any contradiction. It is thevictims who made injustice possible. It is the men of reason who made itpossible for the rule of the brute to work. The despoiling of reason has beenthe motive of every anti-reason creed on earth. The despoiling of ability hasbeen the purpose of every creed that preached self-sacrifice. The despoilershave always known it. We haven't. The time has come for us to see. What weare now asked to worship, what had once been dressed as God or king, is thenaked, twisted, mindless figure of the human Incompetent. This is the newideal, the goal to aim at, the purpose to live for, and all men are to berewarded according to how close they approach it. This is the age of thecommon man, they tell us—a title which any man may claim to the extent ofsuch distinction as he has managed not to achieve. He will rise to a rank ofnobility by means of the effort he has failed to make, he will be honored forsuch virtue as he has not displayed, and he will be paid for the goods whichhe did not produce. But we—we, who must atone for the guilt of ability—wewill work to support him as he orders, with his pleasure as our only reward.Since we have the most to contribute, we will have the least to say. Since wehave the better capacity to think, we will not be permitted a thought of ourown. Since we have the judgment to act, we will not be permitted an action ofour choice. We will work under directives and controls, issued by those whoare incapable of working. They will dispose of our energy, because they havenone to offer, and of our product, because they can't produce. Do you saythat this is impossible, that it cannot be made to work? They know it, but itis you who don't—and they are counting on you not to know it. They arecounting on you to go on, to work to the limit of the inhuman and to feedthem while you last—and when you collapse, there will be another victimstarting out and feeding them, while struggling to survive—and the span ofeach succeeding victim will be shorter, and while you'll die to leave them a

railroad, your last descendant-in-spirit will die to leave them a loaf ofbread.

This does not worry the looters of the moment. Their plan—like all theplans of all the royal looters of the past—is only that the loot shall lasttheir lifetime. It has always lasted before, because in one generation theycould not run out of victims. But this time—it will not last. The victims areon strike. We are on strike against martyrdom—and against the moral code thatdemands it. We are on strike against those who believe that one man mustexist for the sake of another. We are on strike against the morality ofcannibals, be it practiced in body or in spirit. We will not deal with men onany terms but ours—and our terms are a moral code which holds that man is anend in himself and not the means to any end of others. We do not seek toforce our code upon them. They are free to believe what they please. But, foronce, they will have to believe it and to exist—without our help. And, onceand for all, they will learn the meaning of their creed. That creed haslasted for centuries solely by the sanction of the victims—by means of thevictims' acceptance of punishment for breaking a code impossible to practice.But that code was intended to be broken. It is a code that thrives not onthose who observe it, but on those who don't, a morality kept in existencenot by virtue of its saints, but by the grace of its shiners. We have decidednot to be sinners any longer. We have ceased breaking that moral code. Weshall blast it out of existence forever by the one method that it can'twithstand: by obeying it. We are obeying it. We are complying. In dealingwith our fellow men, we are observing their code of values to the letter andsparing them all the evils they denounce. The mind is evil? We have withdrawnthe works of our minds from society, and not a single idea of ours is to beknown or used by men. Ability is a selfish evil that leaves no chance tothose who are less able? We have withdrawn from the competition and left allchances open to incompetents. The pursuit of wealth is greed, the root of allevil? We do not seek to make fortunes any longer. It is evil to earn morethan one's bare sustenance? We take nothing but the lowliest jobs and weproduce, by the effort of our muscles, no more than we consume for ourimmediate needs—with not a penny nor an inventive thought left over to harmthe world. It is evil to succeed, since success is made by the strong at theexpense of the weak? We have ceased burdening the weak with our ambition andhave left them free to prosper without us. It is evil to be an employer? Wehave no employment to offer. It is evil to own property? We own nothing. Itis evil to enjoy one's existence in this world? There is no form of enjoymentthat we seek from their world, and—this was hardest for us to attain—what wenow feel for their world is that emotion which they preach as an ideal:indifference—the blank—the zero—the mark of death. . . .

We are giving men everything they've professed to want and to seek asvirtue for centuries. Now let them see whether they want it."

"It was you who started this strike?" she asked.

"I did."

He got up, he stood, hands in pockets, his face in the light—and she sawhim smile with the easy, effortless, implacable amusement of certainty.

"We've heard so much about strikes," he said, "and about the dependence ofthe uncommon man upon the common. We've heard it shouted that theindustrialist is a parasite, that his workers support him, create his wealth,make his luxury possible—and what would happen to him if they walked out?Very well. I propose to show to the world who depends on whom, who supportswhom, who is the source of wealth, who makes whose livelihood possible andwhat happens to whom when who walks out."

The windows were now sheets of darkness, reflecting the dots of lightedcigarettes. He picked a cigarette from a table beside him, and in the flare

of a match she saw the brief sparkle of gold, the dollar sign, between hisfingers.

"I quit and joined him and went on strike," said Hugh Akston, "because Icould not share my profession with men who claim that the qualification of anintellectual consists of denying the existence of the intellect. People wouldnot employ a plumber who'd attempt to prove his professional excellence byasserting that there's no such thing as plumbing—but, apparently, the samestandards of caution are not considered necessary in regard to philosophers.I learned from my own pupil, however, that it was I who made this possible.When thinkers accept those who deny the existence of thinking, as fellowthinkers of a different school of thought—it is they who achieve thedestruction of the mind. They grant the enemy's basic premise, thus grantingthe sanction of reason to formal dementia, A basic premise is an absolutethat permits no co-operation with its antithesis and tolerates no tolerance.In the same manner and for the same reason as a banker may not accept andpass counterfeit money, granting it the sanction, honor and prestige of hisbank, just as he may not grant the counterfeiter's demand for tolerance of amere difference of opinion—so I may not grant the title of philosopher to Dr.Simon Pritchett or compete with him for the minds of men. Dr. Pritchett hasnothing to deposit to the account of philosophy, except his declaredintention to destroy it. He seeks to cash in—by means of denying it—on thepower of reason among men. He seeks to stamp the mint-mark of reason upon theplans of his looting masters. He seeks to use the prestige of philosophy topurchase the enslavement of thought. But that prestige is an account whichcan exist only so long as I am there to sign the checks.

Let him do it without me. Let him—and those who entrust to him theirchildren's minds—have exactly that which they demand: a world ofintellectuals without intellect and of thinkers who proclaim that they cannotthink. I am conceding it. I am complying. And when they see the absolutereality of their non-absolute world, I will not be there and it will not be Iwho will pay the price of their contradictions."

"Dr. Akston quit on the principle of sound banking," said Midas Mulligan."I quit on the principle of love. Love is the ultimate form of recognitionone grants to superlative values. It was the Hunsacker case that made mequit—that case when a court of law ordered that I honor, as first right to mydepositors' funds, the demand of those who would offer proof that they had noright to demand it. I was ordered to hand out money earned by men, to aworthless rotter whose only claim consisted of his inability to earn it. Iwas born on a farm. I knew the meaning of money. I had dealt with many men inmy life. I had watched them grow. I had made my fortune by being able to spota certain kind of man. The kind who never asked you for faith, hope andcharity, but offered you facts, proof and profit. Did you know that Iinvested in Hank Rearden's business at the time when he was rising, when hehad just beaten his way out of Minnesota to buy the steel mills inPennsylvania? Well, when I looked at that court order on my desk, I had avision. I saw a picture, and I saw it so clearly that it changed the looks ofeverything for me. I saw the bright face and the eyes of young Rearden, ashe'd been when I'd met him first. I saw him lying at the foot of an altar,with his blood running down into the earth—and what stood on that altar wasLee Hunsacker, with the mucus-filled eyes, whining that he'd never had achance. . . . It's strange how simple things become, once you see themclearly. It wasn't hard for me to close the bank and go: I kept seeing, forthe first time in my life, what it was that I had lived for and loved."

She looked at Judge Narragansett. "You quit over the same case, didn'tyou?"

"Yes," said Judge Narragansett. "I quit when the court of appeals reversedmy ruling. The purpose for which I had chosen my work, was my resolve to be a

guardian of justice. But the laws they asked me to enforce made me theexecutor of the vilest injustice conceivable. I was asked to use force toviolate the rights of disarmed men, who came before me to seek my protectionfor their rights. Litigants obey the verdict of a tribunal solely on thepremise that there is an objective rule of conduct, which they both accept.Now I saw that one man was to be bound by it, but the other was not, one wasto obey a rule, the other was to assert an arbitrary wish—his need—and thelaw was to stand on the side of the wish. Justice was to consist of upholdingthe unjustifiable. I quit—because I could not have borne to hear the words'Your Honor' addressed to me by an honest man."

Her eyes moved slowly to Richard Halley, as if she were both pleading andafraid to hear his story. He smiled.

"I would have forgiven men for my struggle," said Richard Halley.

"It was their view of my success that I could not forgive. I had felt nohatred in all the years when they rejected me. If my work was new, I had togive them time to learn, if I took pride in being first to break a trail to aheight of my own, I had no right to complain if others were slow to follow.That was what I had told myself through all those years —except on somenights, when I could neither wait nor believe any longer, when I cried 'why?'but found no answer. Then, on the night when they chose to cheer me, I stoodbefore them on the stage of a theater, thinking that this was the moment Ihad struggled to reach, wishing to feel it, but feeling nothing. I was seeingall the other nights behind me, hearing the 'why?' which still had no answer—and their cheers seemed as empty as their snubs. If they had said, 'Sorry tobe so late, thank you for waiting—I would have asked for nothing else andthey could have had anything I had to give them. But what I saw in theirfaces, and in the way they spoke when they crowded to praise me, was thething I had heard being preached to artists—only I had never believed thatanyone human could mean it. They seemed to say that they owed me nothing,that their deafness had provided me with a moral goal, that it had been myduty to struggle, to suffer, to bear—for their sake—whatever sneers,contempt, injustice, torture they chose to inflict upon me, to bear it inorder to teach them to enjoy my work, that this was their rightful due and myproper purpose. And then I understood the nature of the looter-in-spirit, athing I had never been able to conceive. I saw them reaching into my soul,just as they reach into Mulligan's pocket, reaching to expropriate the valueof my person, just as they reach to expropriate his wealth—I saw theimpertinent malice of mediocrity boastfully holding up its own emptiness asan abyss to be filled by the bodies of its betters—I saw them seeking, justas they seek to feed on Mulligan's money, to feed on those hours when I wrotemy music and on that which made me write it, seeking to gnaw their way toself-esteem by extorting from me the admission that they were the goal of mymusic, so that precisely by reason of my achievement, it would not be theywho'd acknowledge my value, but I who would bow to theirs. ... It was thatnight that I took the oath never to let them hear another note of mine. Thestreets were empty when I left that theater, I was the last one to leave—andI saw a man whom I had never seen before, waiting for me in the light of alamppost. He did not have to tell me much. But the concerto I dedicated tohim is called the Concerto of Deliverance."

She looked at the others. "Please tell me your reasons," she said, with afaint stress of firmness in her voice, as if she were taking a beating, butwished to take it to the end.

"I quit when medicine was placed under State control, some years ago,"said Dr. Hendricks. "Do you know what it takes to perform a brain operation?Do you know the kind of skill it demands, and the years of passionate,merciless, excruciating devotion that go to acquire that skill? That was whatI would not place at the disposal of men whose sole qualification to rule me

was their capacity to spout the fraudulent generalities that got them electedto the privilege of enforcing their wishes at the point of a gun. I would notlet them dictate the purpose for which my years of study had been spent, orthe conditions of my work, or my choice of patients, or the amount of myreward. I observed that in all the discussions that preceded the enslavementof medicine, men discussed everything—except the desires of the doctors. Menconsidered only the 'welfare' of the patients, with no thought for those whowere to provide it. That a doctor should have any right, desire or choice inthe matter, was regarded as irrelevant selfishness; his is not to choose,they said, only 'to serve.' That a man who's willing to work under compulsionis too dangerous a brute to entrust with a job in the stockyards—neveroccurred to those who proposed to help the sick by making life impossible forthe healthy. I have often wondered at the smugness with which people asserttheir right to enslave me, to control my work, to force my will, to violatemy conscience, to stifle my mind—yet what is it that they expect to dependon, when they lie on an operating table under my hands? Their moral code hastaught them to believe that it is safe to rely on the virtue of theirvictims. Well, that is the virtue I have withdrawn. Let them discover thekind of doctors that their system will now produce. Let them discover, intheir operating rooms and hospital wards, that it is not safe to place theirlives in the hands of a man whose life they have throttled. It is not safe,if he is the sort of man who resents it—and still less safe, if he is thesort who doesn't."

"I quit," said Ellis Wyatt, "because I didn't wish to serve as thecannibals' meal and to do the cooking, besides,"

"I discovered," said Ken Danagger, "that the men I was fighting wereimpotent. The shiftless, the purposeless, the irresponsible, the irrational-it was not I who needed them, it was not theirs to dictate terms to me, itwas not mine to obey demands. I quit, to let them discover it, too."

"I quit, " said Quentin Daniels, "because, if there are degrees ofdamnation, the scientist who places his mind in the service of brute force isthe longest-range murderer on earth."

They were silent. She turned to Gait. "And you?" she asked. "You werefirst. What made you come to it?"

He chuckled, "My refusal to be born with any original sin."

"What do you mean?"

"I have never felt guilty of my ability. I have never felt guilty of mymind. I have never felt guilty of being a man. I accepted no unearned guilt,and thus was free to earn and to know my own value. Ever since I canremember, I had felt that I would kill the man who'd claim that I exist forthe sake of his need—and I had known that this was the highest moral feeling.That night, at the Twentieth Century meeting, when I heard an unspeakableevil being spoken in a tone of moral righteousness, I saw the root of theworld's tragedy, the key to it and the solution. I saw what had to be done. Iwent out to do it."

"And the motor?" she asked. "Why did you abandon it? Why did you leave itto the Starnes heirs?"

"It was then- father's property. He paid me for it. It was made on histime. But I knew that it would be of no benefit to them and that no one wouldever hear of it again. It was my first experimental model.

Nobody but me or my equivalent could have been able to complete it or evento grasp what it was. And I knew that no equivalent of mine would come nearthat factory from then on."

"You knew the kind of achievement your motor represented?"

"Yes."

"And you knew you were leaving it to perish?"

"Yes." He looked off into the darkness beyond the windows and chuckledsoftly, but it was not a sound of amusement. "I looked at my motor for thelast tune, before I left. I thought of the men who claim that wealth is amatter of natural resources—and of the men who claim that wealth is a matterof seizing the factories—and of the men who claim that machines conditiontheir brains. Well, there was the motor to condition them, and there itremained as just exactly what it is without man's mind—as a pile of metalscraps and wires, going to rust. You have been thinking of the great servicewhich that motor could have rendered to mankind, if it had been put intoproduction. I think that on the day when men understand the meaning of itsfate in that factory's junk heap—it will have rendered a greater one."

"Did you expect to see that day, when you left it?"

"No. "

"Did you expect a chance to rebuild it elsewhere?""No. "

"And you were willing to let it remain in a junk heap?"

"For the sake of what that motor meant to me," he said slowly, "I had tobe willing to let it crumble and vanish forever"—he looked straight at herand she heard the steady, unhesitant, uninflected ruthlessness of his voice—"just as you will have to be willing to let the rail of TaggartTranscontinental crumble and vanish."

She held his eyes, her head was lifted, and she said softly, in the toneof a proudly open plea, "Don't make me answer you now."

"I won't. We'll tell you whatever you wish to know. We won't urge you tomake a decision." He added, and she was shocked by the sudden gentleness ofhis voice, "I said that that kind of indifference toward a world which shouldhave been ours was the hardest thing to attain. I know. We've all gonethrough it."

She looked at the quiet, impregnable room, and at the light—the light thatcame from his motor—on the faces of men who were the most serene andconfident gathering she had ever attended.

"What did you do, when you walked out of the Twentieth Century?"

she asked.

"I went out to become a flame-spotter. I made it my job to watch for thosebright flares in the growing night of savagery, which were the men ofability, the men of the mind—to watch their course, their struggle and theiragony—and to pull them out, when I knew that they had seen enough."

"What did you tell them to make them abandon everything?"

"I told them that they were right."

In answer to the silent question of her glance, he added, "I gave them thepride they did not know they had. I gave them the words to identify it. Igave them that priceless possession which they had missed, had longed for,yet had not known they needed: a moral sanction. Did you call me thedestroyer and the hunter of men? I was the walking delegate of this strike,the leader of the victims' rebellion, the defender of the oppressed, thedisinherited, the exploited—and when I use these words, they have, for once,a literal meaning."

"Who were the first to follow you?"

He let a moment pass, in deliberate emphasis, then answered, "My two bestfriends. You know one of them. You know, perhaps better than anyone else,what price he paid for it. Our own teacher, Dr.

Akston, was next. He joined us within one evening's conversation. WilliamHastings, who had been my boss in the research laboratory of TwentiethCentury Motors, had a hard time, fighting it out with himself. It took him ayear. But he joined. Then Richard Halley. Then Midas Mulligan."

"—who took fifteen minutes," said Mulligan.

She turned to him. "It was you who established this valley?"

"Yes," said Mulligan. "It was just my own private retreat, at first. Ibought it years ago, I bought miles of these mountains, section by section,from ranchers and cattlemen who didn't know what they owned. The valley isnot listed on any map. I built this house, when I decided to quit. I cut offall possible avenues of approach, except one road—and it's camouflaged beyondanyone's power to discover—and I stocked this place to be self-supporting, sothat I could live here for the rest of my life and never have to see the faceof a looter. When I heard that John had got Judge Narragansett, too, Iinvited the Judge to come here. Then we asked Richard Halley to join us. Theothers remained outside, at first."

"We had no rules of any kind," said Gait, "except one. When a man took ouroath, it meant a single commitment: not to work in his own profession, not togive to the world the benefit of his mind. Each of us carried it out in anymanner he chose. Those who had money, retired to live on their savings. Thosewho had to work, took the lowest jobs they could find. Some of us had beenfamous; others—like that young brakeman of yours, whom Halley discovered—werestopped by us before they had set out to get tortured. But we did not give upour minds or the work we loved. Each of us continued in his real profession,in whatever manner and spare time he could manage—but he did it secretly, forhis own sole benefit, giving nothing to men, sharing nothing. We werescattered all over the country, as the outcasts we had always been, only nowwe accepted our parts with conscious intention.

Our sole relief were the rare occasions when we could see one another.

We found that we liked to meet—in order to be reminded that human beingsstill existed. So we came to set aside one month a year to spend in thisvalley—to rest, to live in a rational world, to bring our real work out ofhiding, to trade our achievements—here, where achievements meant payment, notexpropriation. Each of us built his own house here, at his own expense—forone month of life out of twelve.

It made the eleven easier to bear."

"You see, Miss Taggart," said Hugh Akston, "man is a social being, but notin the way the looters preach."

"It's the destruction of Colorado that started the growth of this valley,"said Midas Mulligan. "Ellis Wyatt and the others came to live herepermanently, because they had to hide. Whatever part of their wealth theycould salvage, they converted into gold or machines, as I had, and theybrought it here. There were enough of us to develop the place and to createjobs for those who had had to earn their living outside. We have now reachedthe stage where most of us can live here full time. The valley is almostself-supporting—and as to the goods that we can't yet produce, I purchasethem from the outside through a pipe line of my own. It's a special agent, aman who does not let my money reach the looters. We are not a state here, nota society of any kind—

we're just a voluntary association of men held together by nothing butevery man's self-interest. I own the valley and I sell the land to theothers, when they want it. Judge Narragansett is to act as our arbiter, hicase of disagreements. He hasn't had to be called upon, as yet. They say thatit's hard for men to agree. You'd be surprised how easy it is—

when both parties hold as their moral absolute that neither exists for thesake of the other and that reason is their only means of trade. The time isapproaching when all of us will have to be called to live here—

because the world is falling apart so fast that it will soon be starving.

But we will be able to support ourselves in this valley."

"The world is crashing faster than we expected," said Hugh Akston.

"Men are stopping and giving up. Your frozen trains, the gangs of raiders,the deserters, they're men who've never heard of us, and they're not part ofour strike, they are acting on their own—it's the natural response of

whatever rationality is still left in them—it's the same kind of protest asours."

"We started with no time limit in view," said Gait. "We did not knowwhether we'd live to see the liberation of the world or whether we'd have toleave our battle and our secret to the next generations.

We knew only that this was the only way we cared to live. But now we thinkthat we will see, and soon, the day of our victory and of our return."

"When?" she whispered.

"When the code of the looters has collapsed."

He saw her looking at him, her glance half-question, half-hope, and headded, "When the creed of self-immolation has run, for once, its undisguisedcourse—when men find no victims ready to obstruct the path of justice and todeflect the fall of retribution on themselves—

when the preachers of self-sacrifice discover that those who are willingto practice it, have nothing to sacrifice, and those who have, are notwilling any longer—when men see that neither their hearts nor their musclescan save them, but the mind they damned is not there to answer then: screamsfor help—when they collapse as they must, as men without mind—when they haveno pretense of authority left, no remnant of law, no trace of morality, nohope, no food and no way to obtain it—when they collapse and the road isclear—then we'll come back to rebuild the world."

The Taggart Terminal, she thought; she heard the words beating through thenumbness of her mind, as the sum of a burden she had not had time to weigh.This was the Taggart Terminal, she thought, this room, not the giantconcourse in New York—this was her goal, the end of track, the point beyondthe curve of the earth where the two straight lines of rail met and vanished,drawing her forward—as they had drawn Nathaniel Taggart—this was the goalNathaniel Taggart had seen in the distance and this was the point stillholding the straight-line glance of his lifted head above the spiral motionof men in the granite concourse. It was for the sake of this that she haddedicated herself to the rail of Taggart Transcontinental, as to the body ofa spirit yet to be found. She had found it, everything she had ever wanted,it was here in this room, reached and hers—but the price was that net of railbehind her, the rail that would vanish, the bridges that would crumble, thesignal lights that would go out. . . . And yet . . . Everything I had everwanted, she thought—looking away from the figure of a man with sun-coloredhair and implacable eyes.

"You don't have to answer us now."

She raised her head; he was watching her as if he had followed the stepsin her mind.

"We never demand agreement," he said. "We never tell anyone more than heis ready to hear You are the first person who has learned our secret ahead oftime. But you're here and you had to know. Now you know the exact nature ofthe choice you'll have to make. If it seems hard, it's because you stillthink that it does not have to be one or the other. You will learn that itdoes."

"Will you give me time?"

"Your time is not ours to give. Take your time. You alone can decide whatyou'll choose to do, and when. We know the cost of that decision. We've paidit. That you've come here might now make it easier for you—or harder."

"Harder," she whispered.

"I know."

He said it, his voice as low as hers, with the same sound of being forcedpast one's breath, and she missed an instant of time, as in the stillnessafter a blow, because she felt that this—not the moments when he had carriedher in his arms down the mountainside, but this meeting of their voices—hadbeen the closest physical contact between them.

A full moon stood in the sky above the valley, when they drove back to hishouse; it stood like a flat, round lantern without rays, with a haze of lighthanging in space, not reaching the ground, and the illumination seemed tocome from the abnormal white brightness of the soil. In the unnaturalstillness of sight without color, the earth seemed veiled by a film ofdistance, its shapes did not merge into a landscape, but went slowly flowingpast, like the print of a photograph on a cloud.

She noticed suddenly that she was smiling. She was looking down at thehouses of the valley. Their lighted windows were dimmed by a bluish cast, theoutlines of their walls were dissolving, long bands of mist were coilingamong them in torpid, unhurried waves. It looked like a city sinking underwater.

"What do they call this place?" she asked.

"I call it Mulligan's Valley," he said. "The others call it Gait's Gulch.""I'd call it—" but she did not finish.

He glanced at her. She knew what he saw in her face. He turned away.

She saw a faint movement of his lips, like the release of a breath that hewas forcing to function. She dropped her glance, her arm falling against theside of the car, as if her hand were suddenly too heavy for the weakness inthe crook of her elbow.

The road grew darker, as it went higher, and pine branches met over theirheads. Above a slant of rock moving to meet them, she saw the moonlight onthe windows of his house. Her head fell back against the seat and she laystill, losing awareness of the car, feeling only the motion that carried herforward, watching the glittering drops of water in the pine branches, whichwere the stars.

When the car stopped, she did not permit herself to know why she did notlook at him as she stepped, out. She did not know that she stood still for aninstant, looking up at the dark windows. She did not hear him approach; butshe felt the impact of his hands with shocking intensity, as if it were theonly awareness she could now experience.

He lifted her in his arms and started slowly up the path to the house.

He walked, not looking at her, holding her tight, as if trying to hold aprogression of time, as if his arms were still locked over the moment when hehad lifted her against his chest. She felt his steps as if they were a singlespan of motion to a goal and as if each step were a separate moment in whichshe dared not think of the next.

Her head was close to his, his hair brushing her cheek, and she knew thatneither of them would move his face that one breath closer. It was a sudden,stunned state of quiet drunkenness, complete in itself, their hair mingledlike the rays of two bodies in space that had achieved their meeting, she sawthat he walked with his eyes closed, as if even sight would now be anintrusion.

He entered the house, and as he moved across the living room, he did notlook to his left and neither did she, but she knew that both of them wereseeing the door on his left that led to his bedroom. He walked the length ofthe darkness to the wedge of moonlight that fell across the guest-room bed,he placed her down upon it, she felt an instant's pause of his hands stillholding her shoulder and waistline, and when his hands left her body, sheknew that the moment was over.

He stepped back and pressed a switch, surrendering the room to the harshlypublic glare of light. He stood still, as if demanding that she look at him,his face expectant and stern.

"Have you forgotten that you wanted to shoot me on sight?" he asked.

It was the unprotected stillness of his figure that made it real. Theshudder that threw her upright was like a cry of terror and denial; but sheheld his glance and answered evenly, "That's true. I did."

"Then stand by it."

Her voice was low, its intensity was both a surrender and a scornfulreproach: "You know better than that, don't you?"

He shook his head. "No. I want you to remember that that had been yourwish. You were right, in the past. So long as you were part of the outerworld, you had to seek to destroy me. And of the two courses now open to you,one will lead you to the day when you will find yourself forced to do it."She did not answer, she sat looking down, he saw the strands of her hairswing jerkily as she shook her head in desperate protest. "You are my onlydanger. You are the only person who could deliver me to my enemies. If youremain with them, you will. Choose that, if you wish, but choose it with fullknowledge.

Don't answer me now. But until you do"—the stress of severity in his voicewas the sound of effort directed against himself—"remember that I know themeaning of either answer."

"As fully as I do?" she whispered.

"As fully."

He turned to go, when her eyes fell suddenly upon the inscriptions she hadnoticed, and forgotten, on the walls of the room.

They were cut into the polish of the wood, still showing the force of thepencil's pressure in the hands that had made them, each in his own violentwriting: "You'll get over it—Ellis Wyatt" "It will be all right by morning-Ken Danagger" "It's worth it—Roger Marsh."

There were others, "What is that?" she asked.

He smiled. "This is the room where they spent their first night in thevalley. The first night is the hardest. It's the last pull of the break withone's memories, and the worst. I let them stay here, so they can call for me,if they want me. I speak to them, if they can't sleep.

Most of them can't. But they're free of it by morning. . . . They've allgone through this room. Now they call it the torture chamber or the anteroom—because everyone has to enter the valley through my house."

He turned to go, he stopped on the threshold and added: "This is the roomI never intended you to occupy. Good night, Miss Taggart."

CHAPTER IITHE UTOPIA OF GREED

"Good morning."

She looked at him across the living room from the threshold of her door.In the windows behind him, the mountains had that tinge of silver-pink whichseems brighter than daylight, with the promise of a light to come. The sun.had risen somewhere over the earth, but it had not reached the top of thebarrier, and the sky was glowing in its stead, announcing its motion. She hadheard the joyous greeting to the sunrise, which was not the song of birds,but the ringing of the telephone a moment ago; she saw the start of day, notin the shining green of the branches outside, but in the glitter of chromiumon the stove, the sparkle of a glass ashtray on a table, and the crispwhiteness of his shirt sleeves. Irresistibly, she heard the sound of a smilein her own voice, matching his, as she answered: "Good morning."

He was gathering notes of penciled calculations from his desk and stuffingthem into his pocket. "I have to go down to the powerhouse,"

he said. "They've just phoned me that they're having trouble with the rayscreen. Your plane seems to have knocked it off key. I'll be back in half anhour and then I'll cook our breakfast"

It was the casual simplicity of his voice, the manner of taking herpresence and their domestic routine for granted, as if it were of nosignificance to them, that gave her the sense of an underscored significanceand the feeling that he knew it.

She answered as casually, "If you'll bring me the cane I left in the car,I'll have breakfast ready for you by the time you come back."

He glanced at her with a slight astonishment; his eyes moved from herbandaged ankle to the short sleeves of the blouse that left her arms bare todisplay the heavy bandage on her elbow. But the transparent blouse, the opencollar, the hair falling down to the shoulders that seemed innocently nakedunder a thin film of cloth, made her look like a schoolgirl, not an invalid,and her posture made the bandages look irrelevant.

He smiled, not quite at her, but as if in amusement at some sudden memoryof his own. "If you wish," he said.

It was strange to be left alone in his house. Part of it was an emotionshe had never experienced before: an awed respect that made her hesitantlyconscious of her hands, as if to touch any object around her would be toogreat an intimacy. The other part was a reckless sense of ease, a sense ofbeing at home in this place, as if she owned its owner.

It was strange to feel so pure a joy in the simple task of preparing abreakfast. The work seemed an end in itself, as if the motions of filling acoffee pot, squeezing oranges, slicing bread were performed for their ownsake, for the sort of pleasure one expects, but seldom finds, in the motionsof dancing. It startled her to realize that she had not experienced this kindof pleasure in her work since her days at the operator's desk in RockdaleStation.

She was setting the table, when she saw the figure of a man hurrying upthe path to the house, a swift, agile figure that leaped over boulders withthe casual ease of a flight. He threw the door open, calling, "Hey, John!"—and stopped short as he saw her. He wore a dark blue sweater and slacks, hehad gold hair and a face of such shocking perfection of beauty that she stoodstill, staring at him, not in admiration, at first, but in simple disbelief.

He looked at her as if he had not expected to find a woman in this house.Then she saw a look of recognition melting into a different kind ofastonishment, part amusement, part triumph melting into a chuckle.

"Oh, have you joined us?" he asked.

"No," she answered dryly, "I haven't. I'm a scab."

He laughed, like an adult at a child who uses technological words beyondits understanding. "If you know what you're saying, you know that it's notpossible," he said. "Not here."

"I crashed the gate. Literally."

He looked at her bandages, weighing the question, his glance almostinsolent in its open curiosity. "When?""Yesterday.""How?"

"In a plane."

"What were you doing in a plane in this part of the country?"

He had the direct, imperious manner of an aristocrat or a roughneck; helooked like one and was dressed like the other. She considered him for amoment, deliberately letting him wait. "I was trying to land on aprehistorical mirage," she answered. "And I have."

"You are a scab," he said, and chuckled, as if grasping all theimplications of the problem. "Where's John?"

"Mr. Gait is at the powerhouse. He should be back any moment."

He sat down in an armchair, asking no permission, as if he were at home.She turned silently to her work. He sat watching her movements with an opengrin, as if the sight of her laying out cutlery on a kitchen table were thespectacle of some special paradox.

"What did Francisco say when he saw you here?" he asked.

She turned to him with a slight jolt, but answered evenly, "He is not hereyet. "

"Not yet?" He seemed startled. "Are you sure?""So I was told."

He lighted a cigarette. She wondered, watching him, what profession he hadchosen, loved and abandoned in order to join this valley. She could make noguess; none seemed to fit; she caught herself in the preposterous feeling ofwishing that he had no profession at all, because any work seemed toodangerous for his incredible kind of beauty. It was an impersonal feeling,she did not look at him as at a man, but as at an animated work of art—and itseemed to be a stressed indignity of the outer world that a perfection suchas his should be subjected to the shocks, the strains, the scars reserved forany man who loved his work.

But the feeling seemed the more preposterous, because the lines of hisface had the sort of hardness for which no danger on earth was a match, "No,Miss Taggart," he said suddenly, catching her glance, "you've never seen mebefore. "

She was shocked to realize that she had been studying him openly."How do you happen to know who I am?" she asked.

"First, I've seen your pictures in the papers many times. Second, you'rethe only woman left in the outer world, to the best of our knowledge, who'dbe allowed to enter Gait's Gulch, Third, you're the only woman who'd have thecourage—and prodigality—still to remain a scab."

"What made you certain that I was a scab?"

"If you weren't, you'd know that it's not this valley, but the view oflife held by men in the outer world that is a prehistorical mirage."

They heard the sound of the motor and saw the car stopping below, in frontof the house. She noticed the swiftness with which he rose to his feet at thesight of Gait in the car; if it were not for the obvious personal eagerness,it would have looked like an instinctive gesture of military respect.

She noticed the way Gait stopped, when he entered and saw his visitor. Shenoticed that Gait smiled, but that his voice was oddly low, almost solemn, asif weighted with unconfessed relief,, when he said very quietly, "Hello."

"Hi, John," said the visitor gaily.

She noticed that their handshake came an instant too late and lasted aninstant too long, like the handshake of men who had not been certain thattheir previous meeting would not be their last.

Gait turned to her. "Have you met?" he asked, addressing them both.

"Not exactly," said the visitor.

"Miss Taggart, may I present Ragnar Danneskjold?"

She knew what her face had looked like, when she heard Danneskjold's voiceas from a great distance: "You don't have to be frightened, Miss Taggart I'mnot dangerous to anyone in Gait's Gulch."

She could only shake her head, before she recaptured her voice to say,

"It's not what you're doing to anyone . . . it's what they're doing to you. .it

His laughter swept her out of her moment's stupor, "Be careful, MissTaggart. If that's how you're beginning to feel, you won't remain a scab forlong." He added, "But you ought to start by adopting the right things fromthe people in Gait's Gulch, not their mistakes: they've spent twelve yearsworrying about me—needlessly." He glanced at Gait.

"When did you get in?" asked Gait.

"Late last night."

"Sit down. You're going to have breakfast with us.""But where's Francisco? Why isn't he here yet?"

"I don't know," said Gait, frowning slightly. "I asked at the airport,just now. Nobody's heard from him."

As she turned to the kitchen, Gait moved to follow. "No," she said, "it'smy job today."

"Let me help you."

"This is the place where one doesn't ask for help, isn't it?"He smiled. "That's right."

She had never experienced the pleasure of motion, of walking as if herfeet had no weight to carry, as if the support of the cane in her hand weremerely a superfluous touch of elegance, the pleasure of feeling her stepstrace swift, straight lines, of sensing the faultless, spontaneous precisionof her gestures—as she experienced it while placing their food on the tablein front of the two men. Her bearing told them that she knew they werewatching her—she held her head like an actress on a stage, like a woman in aballroom, like the winner of a silent contest.

"Francisco will be glad to know that it's you who were his stand-intoday," said Danneskjold, when she joined them at the table.

"His what?"

"You see, today is June first, and the three of us—John, Francisco and I—have had breakfast together on every June first for twelve years.""Here?"

"Not when we started. But here, ever since this house was built eightyears ago." He shrugged, smiling. "For a man who has more centuries oftradition behind him than I have, it's odd that Francisco should be the firstto break our own tradition."

"And Mr. Gait?" she asked. "How many centuries does he have behind him?"

"John? None at all. None behind him—but all of those ahead."

"Never mind the centuries," said Gait. "Tell me what sort of year you'vehad behind you. Lost any men?"

"No. "

"Lost any of your time?"

"You mean, was I wounded? No. I haven't had a scratch since that one time,ten years ago, when I was still an amateur, which you ought to forget by now.I wasn't in any danger whatever, this year—in fact, I was much more safe thanif I were running a small-town drugstore under Directive 10-289."

"Lost any battles?"

"No. The losses were all on the other side, this year. The looters lostmost of their ships to me—and most of their men to you. You've had a goodyear, too, haven't you? I know, I've kept track of it. Since our lastbreakfast together, you got everyone you wanted from the state of Colorado,and a few others besides, such as Ken Danagger, who was a great prize to get.But let me tell you about a still greater one, who is almost yours. You'regoing to get him soon, because he's hanging by a thin thread and is justabout ready to fall at your feet. He's a man who saved my life—so you can seehow far he's gone."

Gait leaned back, his eyes narrowing. "So you weren't in any dangerwhatever, were you?"

Danneskjold laughed. "Oh, I took a slight risk. It was worth it. It wasthe most enjoyable encounter I've ever had. I've been waiting to tell youabout it in person. It's a story you'll want to hear. Do you know who the manwas? Hank Rearden. I—"

"No ! "

It was Gait's voice; it was a command; the brief snap of sound had a tingeof violence neither of them had ever heard from him before."What?" asked Danneskjold softly, incredulously."Don't tell me about it now."

"But you've always said that Hank Rearden was the one man you wanted tosee here most."

"I still do. But you'll tell me later."

She studied Gait's face intently, but she could find no clue, only aclosed, impersonal look, either of determination or of control, thattightened the skin of his cheekbones and the line of his mouth. No matterwhat he knew about her, she thought, the only knowledge that could explainthis, was a knowledge he had had no way of acquiring.

"You've met Hank Rearden?" she asked, turning to Danneskjold.

"And he saved your life?"

"Yes."

"I want to hear about it.""I don't," said Gait."Why not?"

"You're not one of us, Miss Taggart."

"I see." She smiled, with a faint touch of defiance. "Were you thinkingthat I might prevent you from getting Hank Rearden?""No, that was not what I was thinking,"

She noticed that Danneskjold was studying Gait's face, as if he, too,found the incident inexplicable. Gait held his glance, deliberately andopenly, as if challenging him to find the explanation and promising that hewould fail. She knew that Danneskjold had failed, when she saw a faint creaseof humor softening Gait's eyelids.

"What else," asked Gait, "have you accomplished this year?"

"I've defied the law of gravitation."

"You've always done that. In what particular form now?"

"In the form of a flight from mid-Atlantic to Colorado in a plane loadedwith gold beyond the safety point of its capacity. Wait till Midas sees theamount I have to deposit. My customers, this year, will become richer by-Say, have you told Miss Taggart that she's one of my customers?"

"No, not yet You may tell her, if you wish."

"I'm—What did you say I am?" she asked.

"Don't be shocked, Miss Taggart," said Danneskjold. "And don't object. I'mused to objections. I'm a sort of freak here, anyway. None of them approve ofmy particular method of fighting our battle. John doesn't, Dr. Akstondoesn't. They think that my life is too valuable for it. But, you see, my

father was a bishop—and of all his teachings there was only one sentence thatI accepted: 'All they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.' ""What do you mean?"

"That violence is not practical. If my fellow men believe that the forceof the combined tonnage of their muscles is a practical means to rule me—letthem learn the outcome of a contest in which there's nothing but brute forceon one side, and force ruled by a mind, on the other. Even John grants methat in our age I had the moral right to choose the course I've chosen. I amdoing just what he is doing-only in my own way. He is withdrawing man's spirit from the looters, I'mwithdrawing the products of man's spirit. He is depriving them of reason, I'mdepriving them of wealth. He is draining the soul of the world, I'm drainingits body. His is the lesson they have to learn, only I'm impatient and I'mhastening their scholastic progress. But, like John, I'm simply complyingwith their moral code and refusing to grant them a double standard at myexpense. Or at Rearden's expense. Or at yours.""What are you talking about?"

"About a method of taxing the income taxers. All methods of taxation arecomplex, but this one is very simple, because it's the naked essence of allthe others. Let me explain it to you."

She listened. She heard a sparkling voice reciting, in the tone of a drylymeticulous bookkeeper, a report about financial transfers, bank accounts,income-tax returns, as if he were reading the dusty pages of a ledger—aledger where every entry was made by means of offering his own blood as thecollateral to be drained at any moment, at any slip of his bookkeeping pen.As she listened, she kept seeing the perfection of his face—and she keptthinking that this was the head on which the world had placed a price ofmillions for the purpose of delivering it to the rot of death. . . . The faceshe had thought too beautiful for the scars of a productive career—she keptthinking numbly, missing half his words—the face too beautiful to risk. . . .Then it struck her that his physical perfection was only a simpleillustration, a childish lesson given to her in crudely obvious terms on thenature of the outer world and on the fate of any human value in a subhumanage. Whatever the justice or the evil of his course, she thought, how couldthey . . . no!

she thought, his course was just, and this was the horror of it, thatthere was no other course for justice to select, that she could not condemnhim, that she could neither approve nor utter a word of reproach.

". . . and the names of my customers, Miss Taggart, were chosen slowly,one by one. I had to be certain of the nature of their character and career.On my list of restitution, your name was one of the first."

She forced herself to keep her face expressionlessly tight, and sheanswered only, "I see."

"Your account is one of the last left unpaid. It is here, at the MulliganBank, to be claimed by you on the day when you join us."

"I see."

"Your account, however, is not as large as some of the others, even thoughhuge sums were extorted from you by force in the past twelve years. You willfind—as it is marked on the copies o£ your income-tax returns which Mulliganwill hand over to you—that I have refunded only those taxes which you paid onthe salary you earned as Operating Vice-President, but not the taxes you paidon your income from your Taggart Transcontinental stock. You deserved everypenny of that stock, and in the days of your father I would have refundedevery penny of your profit—but under your brother's management, TaggartTranscontinental has taken its share of the looting, it has made profits byforce, by means of government favors, subsidies, moratoriums, directives. Youwere not responsible for it, you were, in fact, the greatest victim of that

policy—but I refund only the money which was made by pure productive ability,not the money any part of which was loot taken by force.""I see."

They had finished their breakfast. Danneskjold lighted a cigarette andwatched her for an instant through the first jet of smoke, as if he knew theviolence of the conflict in her mind—then he grinned at Gait and rose to hisfeet.

"I'll run along," he said. "My wife is waiting for me.""What?" she gasped.

"My wife," he repeated gaily, as if he had not understood the reason ofher shock.

"Who is your wife?""Kay Ludlow."

The implications that struck her were more than she could bear toconsider. "When . . . when were you married?""Four years ago."

"How could you show yourself anywhere long enough to go through a weddingceremony?"

"We were married here, by Judge Narragansett."

"How can"—she tried to stop, but the words burst involuntarily, inhelplessly indignant protest, whether against him, fate or the outer world,she could not tell—"how can she live through eleven months of thinking thatyou, at any moment, might be . . . ?" She did not finish.

He was smiling, but she saw the enormous solemnity of that which he andhis wife had needed to earn their right to this kind of smile. "She can livethrough it, Miss Taggart, because we do not hold the belief that this earthis a realm of misery where man is doomed to destruction.

We do not think that tragedy is our natural fate and we do not live inchronic dread of disaster. We do not expect disaster until we have specificreason to expect it—and when we encounter it, we are free to fight it. It isnot happiness, but suffering that we consider unnatural. It is not success,but calamity that we regard as the abnormal exception in human life."

Gait accompanied him to the door, then came back, sat down at the tableand in a leisurely manner reached for another cup of coffee.

She shot to her feet, as if flung by a jet of pressure breaking a safetyvalve. "Do you think that I'll ever accept his money?"

He waited until the curving streak of coffee had filled his cup, thenglanced up at her and answered, "Yes, I think so."

"Well, I won't! I won't let him risk his life for it!"

"You have no choice about that."

"I have the choice never to claim it!"

"Yes, you have."

"Then it will lie in that bank till doomsday!"

"No, it won't. If you don't claim it, some part of it—a very small part-will be turned over to me in your name.""In my name? Why?"

"To pay for your room and board."

She stared at him, her look of anger switching to bewilderment, thendropped slowly back on her chair.

He smiled. "How long did you think you were going to stay here, MissTaggart?" He saw her startled look of helplessness. "You haven't thought ofit? I have. You're going to stay here for a month. For the one month of ourvacation, like the rest of us. I am not asking for your consent—you did notask for ours when you came here. You broke our rules, so you'll have to takethe consequences. Nobody leaves the valley during this month. I could let yougo, of course, but I won't.

There's no rule demanding that I hold you, but by forcing your way here,you've given me the right to any choice I make—and I'm going to hold yousimply because I want you here. If, at the end of a month, you decide thatyou wish to go back, you will be free to do so. Not until then."

She sat straight, the planes of her face relaxed, the shape of her mouthsoftened by the faint, purposeful suggestion of a smile; it was the dangeroussmile of an adversary, but her eyes were coldly brilliant and veiled at once,like the eyes of an adversary who fully intends to fight, but hopes to lose.

"Very well," she said, "I shall charge you for your room and board—it isagainst our rules to provide the unearned sustenance of another human being.

Some of us have wives and children, but there is a mutual trade involvedin that, and a mutual payment"—he glanced at her—"of a kind I am not entitledto collect. So I shall charge you fifty cents a day and you will pay me whenyou accept the account that lies in your name at the Mulligan Bank. If youdon't accept the account, Mulligan will charge your debt against it and hewill give me the money when I ask for it."

"I shall comply with your terms," she answered; her voice had the shrewd,confident, deliberating slowness of a trader. "But I shall not permit the useof that money for my debts."

"How else do you propose to comply?"

"I propose to earn my room and board."

"By what means?"

"By working."

"In what capacity?"

"In the capacity of your cook and housemaid."

For the first time, she saw him take the shock of the unexpected, in amanner and with a violence she had not foreseen. It was only an explosion oflaughter on his part—but he laughed as if he were hit beyond his defenses,much beyond the immediate meaning of her words; she felt that she had struckhis past, tearing loose some memory and meaning of his own which she couldnot know. He laughed as if he were seeing some distant image, as if he werelaughing in its face, as if this were his victory—and hers.

"If you will hire me," she said, her face severely polite, her toneharshly clear, impersonal and businesslike, "I shall cook your meals, cleanyour house, do your laundry and perform such other duties as are required ofa servant—in exchange for my room, board and such money as I will need forsome items of clothing. I may be slightly handicapped by my injuries for thenext few days, but that will not last and I will be able to do the jobfully."

"Is that what you want to do?" he asked.

"That is what I want to do—" she answered, and stopped before she utteredthe rest of the answer in her mind: more than anything else in the world.

He was still smiling, it was a smile of amusement, but it was as ifamusement could be transmuted into some shining glory. "All right, MissTaggart," he said, "I'll hire you."

She inclined her head in a dryly formal acknowledgment. "Thank you,"

"I will pay you ten dollars a month, in addition to your room and board."

"Very well,"

"I shall be the first man in this valley to hire a servant." He got up,reached into his pocket and threw a five-dollar gold piece down on the table."As advance on your wages," he said.

She was startled to discover, as her hand reached for the gold piece, thatshe felt the eager, desperate, tremulous hope of a young girl on her firstjob: the hope that she would be able to deserve it.

"Yes, sir," she said, her eyes lowered.

Owen Kellogg arrived on the afternoon of her third day in the valley.

She did not know which shocked him most: the sight of her standing on theedge of the airfield as he descended from the plane—the sight of her clothes:her delicate, transparent blouse, tailored by the most expensive shop in NewYork, and the wide, cotton-print skirt she had bought in the valley for sixtycents—her cane, her bandages or the basket of groceries on her arm.

He descended among a group of men, he saw her, he stopped, then ran to heras if flung forward by some emotion so strong that, whatever its nature, itlooked like terror.

"Miss Taggart . . ."he whispered—and said nothing else, while shelaughed, trying to explain how she had come to beat him to his destination.

He listened, as if it were irrelevant, and then he uttered the thing fromwhich he had to recover, "But we thought you were dead."

"Who thought it?"

"All of us . . .1 mean, everybody in the outside world."

Then she suddenly stopped smiling, while his voice began to recapture hisstory and his first sound of joy.

"Miss Taggart, don't you remember? You told me to phone Winston, Colorado,and to tell them that you'd be there by noon of the next day. That was to bethe day before yesterday, May thirty-first. But you did not reach Winston—andby late afternoon, the news was on all the radios that you were lost in aplane crash somewhere in the Rocky Mountains."

She nodded slowly, grasping the events she had not thought of considering.

"I heard it aboard the Comet," he said. "At a small station in the middleof New Mexico, The conductor held us there for an hour, while I helped him tocheck the story on long-distance phones. He was hit by the news just as Iwas. They all were—the train crew, the station agent, the switchmen. Theyhuddled around me while I called the city rooms of newspapers in Denver andNew York. We didn't learn much.

Only that you had left the Afton airfield just before dawn on May thirty-first, that you seemed to be following some stranger's plane, that theattendant had seen you go off southeast—and that nobody had seen you since .. . And that searching parties were combing the Rockies for the wreckage ofyour plane."

She asked involuntarily, "Did the Comet reach San Francisco?"

"I don't know. She was crawling north through Arizona, when I gave up.There were too many delays, too many things going wrong, and a totalconfusion of orders. I got off and spent the night hitchhiking my way toColorado, bumming rides on trucks, on buggies, on horse carts, to get thereon time—to get to our meeting place, I mean, where we gather for Midas' ferryplane to pick us up and bring us here."

She started walking slowly up the path toward the car she had left infront of Hammond's Grocery Market. Kellogg followed, and when he spoke again,his voice dropped a little, slowing down with their steps, as if there weresomething they both wished to delay.

"I got a job for Jeff Alien," he said; his voice had the peculiarly solemntone proper for saying: I have carried out your last will. "Your agent atLaurel grabbed him and put him to work the moment we got there. The agentneeded every able-bodied—no, able-minded—man he could find."

They had reached the car, but she did not get in.

"Miss Taggart, you weren't hurt badly, were you? Did you say you crashed,but it wasn't serious?"

"No, not serious at all. I'll be able to get along without Mr. Mulligan'scar by tomorrow—and in a day or two I won't need this thing, either." Sheswung her cane and tossed it contemptuously into the car.

They stood in silence; she was waiting.

"The last long-distance call I made from that station in New Mexico," hesaid slowly, "was to Pennsylvania. I spoke to Hank Rearden.

I told him everything I knew. He listened, and then there was a pause, andthen he said, 'Thank you for calling me.' " Kellogg's eyes were lowered; headded, "I never want to hear that kind of pause again as long as I live."

He raised his eyes to hers; there was no reproach in his glance, only theknowledge of that which he had not suspected when he heard her request, buthad guessed since.

"Thank you," she said, and threw the door of the car open. "Can I give youa lift? I have to get back and get dinner ready before my employer comeshome."

It was in the first moment of returning to Gait's house, of standing alonein the silent, sun-filled room, that she faced the full meaning of what shefelt. She looked at the window, at the mountains barring the sky in the east.She thought of Hank Rearden as he sat at his desk, now, two thousand milesaway, his face tightened into a retaining wall against agony, as it had beentightened under all the blows of all his years—and she felt a desperate wishto fight his battle, to fight for him, for his past, for that tension of hisface and the courage that fed it—

as she wanted to fight for the Comet that crawled by a last effort acrossa desert on a crumbling track. She shuddered, closing her eyes, feeling as ifshe were guilty of double treason, feeling as if she were suspended in spacebetween this valley and the rest of the earth, with no right to either.

The feeling vanished when she sat facing Gait across the dinner table. Hewas watching her, openly and with an untroubled look, as if her presence werenormal—and as if the sight of her were all he wished to allow into hisconsciousness.

She leaned back a little, as if complying with the meaning of his glance,and said dryly, efficiently, in deliberate denial, "I have checked yourshirts and found one with two buttons missing, and another with the leftelbow worn through. Do you wish me to mend them?"

"Why, yes—if you can do it."

"I can do it."

It did not seem to alter the nature of his glance; it merely seemed tostress its satisfaction, as if this were what he had wished her to say —except that she was not certain whether satisfaction was the name for thething she saw in his eyes and fully certain that he had not wished her to sayanything.

Beyond the window, at the edge of the table, storm clouds had wiped outthe last remnants of light in the eastern sky. She wondered why she felt asudden reluctance to look out, why she felt as if she wanted to cling to thegolden patches of light on the wood of the table, on the buttered crust ofthe rolls, on the copper coffee pot, on Gait's hair —to cling as to a smallisland on the edge of a void.

Then she heard her own voice asking suddenly, involuntarily, and she knewthat this was the treason she had wanted to escape, "Do you permit anycommunication with the outside world?"

"No. "

"Not any? Not even a note without return address?""No. "

"Not even a message, if no secret of yours were given away?"

"Not from here. Not during this month. Not to outsiders at any time,"

She noticed that she was avoiding his eyes, and she forced herself to lifther head and face him. His glance had changed; it was watchful, unmoving,implacably perceptive. He asked, looking at her as if he knew the reason ofher query, "Do you wish to ask for a special exception?"

"No," she answered, holding his glance.

Next morning, after breakfast, when she sat in her room, carefully placinga patch on the sleeve of Gait's shirt, with her door closed, not to let him

see her fumbling effort at an unfamiliar task, she heard the sound of a carstopping in front of the house.

She heard Gait's steps hurrying across the living room, she heard him jerkthe entrance door open and call out with the joyous anger of relief: "It'sabout time!"

She rose to her feet, but stopped: she heard his voice, its tone abruptlychanged and grave, as if in answer to the shock of some sight confrontinghim: "What's the matter?"

"Hello, John," said a clear, quiet voice that sounded steady, but weightedwith exhaustion.

She sat down on her bed, feeling suddenly drained of strength: the voicewas Francisco's.

She heard Gait asking, his tone severe with concern, "What is it?"

"I'll tell you afterwards."

"Why are you so late?"

"I have to leave again in an hour."

"To leave?"

"John, I just came to tell you that I won't be able to stay here thisyear."

There was a pause, then Gait asked gravely, his voice low, "Is it as badas that—whatever it is?"

"Yes. I ... I might be back before the month is over. I don't know." Headded, with the sound of a desperate effort, "I don't know whether to hope tobe done with it quickly or ... or not, "

"Francisco, could you stand a shock right now?"

"I? Nothing could shock me now."

"There's a person, here, in my guest room, whom you have to see.It will be a shock to you, so I think I'd better warn you in advance thatthis person is still a scab."

"What? A scab? In your house?""Let me tell you how—"

"That's something I want to see for myself!"

She heard Francisco's contemptuous chuckle and the rush of his steps, shesaw her door flung open, and she noticed dimly that it was Gait who closedit, leaving them alone.

She did not know how long Francisco stood looking at her, because thefirst moment that she grasped fully was when she saw him on his knees,holding onto her, his face pressed to her legs, the moment when she felt asif the shudder that ran through his body and left him still, had run intohers and made her able to move.

She saw, in astonishment, that her hand was moving gently over his hair,while she was thinking that she had no right to do it and feeling as if acurrent of serenity were flowing from her hand, enveloping them both,smoothing the past. He did not move, he made no sound, as if the act ofholding her said everything he had to say.

When he raised his head, he looked as she had felt when she had opened hereyes in the valley: he looked as if no pain had ever existed in the world. Hewas laughing.

"Dagny, Dagny, Dagny"—his voice sounded, not as if a confession resistedfor years were breaking out, but as if he were repeating the long sinceknown, laughing at the pretense that it had ever been unsaid —"of course Ilove you. Were you afraid when he made me say it?

I'll say it as often as you wish—I love you, darling, I love you, I alwayswill—don't be afraid for me, I don't care if I'll never have you again, whatdoes that matter?—you're alive and you're here and you know everything now.And it's so simple, isn't it? Do you see what it was and why I had to desertyou?" His arm swept out to point at the valley. "There it is—it's your earth,

your kingdom, your kind of world—Dagny, I've always loved you and that Ideserted you, that was my love."

He took her hands and pressed them to his lips and held them, not moving,not as a kiss, but as a long moment of rest—as if the effort of speech were adistraction from the fact of her presence, and as if he were torn by too manythings to say, by the pressure of all the words stored in the silence ofyears.

"The women I chased—you didn't believe that, did you? I've never touchedone of them—but I think you knew it, I think you've known it all along. Theplayboy—it was a part that I had to play in order not to let the looterssuspect me while I was destroying d'Anconia Copper in plain sight of thewhole world. That's the joker in their system, they're out to fight any manof honor and ambition, but let them see a worthless rotter and they thinkhe's a friend, they think he's safe—safe!—that's their view of life, but arethey learning!—are they learning whether evil is safe and incompetencepractical! . . .

Dagny, it was the night when I knew, for the first time, that I loved you—it was then that I knew I had to go. It was when you entered my hotel room,that night, when I saw what you looked like, what you were, what you meant tome—and what awaited you in the future. Had you been less, you might havestopped me for a while. But it was you, you who were the final argument thatmade me leave you. I asked for your help, that night—against John Gait. But Iknew that you were his best weapon against me, though neither you nor hecould know it.

You were everything that he was seeking, everything he told us to live foror die, if necessary. ... I was ready for him, when he called me suddenlyto come to New York, that spring. I had not heard from him for some time. Hewas fighting the same problem I was. He solved it.

. . . Do you remember? It was the time when you did not hear from me forthree years. Dagny, when I took over my father's business, when I began todeal with the whole industrial system of the world, it was then that I beganto see the nature of the evil I had suspected, but thought too monstrous tobelieve. I saw the tax-collecting vermin that had grown for centuries likemildew on d'Anconia Copper, draining us by no right that anyone could name—Isaw the government regulations passed to cripple me, because I wassuccessful, and to help my competitors, because they were loafing failures—Isaw the labor unions who won every claim against me, by reason of my abilityto make their livelihood possible—I saw that any man's desire for money hecould not earn was regarded as a righteous wish, but if he earned it, it wasdamned as greed—I saw the politicians who winked at me, telling me not toworry, because I could just work a little harder and outsmart them all. Ilooked past the profits of the moment, and I saw that the harder I worked,the more I tightened the noose around my throat, I saw that my energy wasbeing poured down a sewer, that the parasites who fed on me were being fedupon in their turn, that they were caught in their own trap—and that therewas no reason for it, no answer known to anyone, that the sewer pipes of theworld, draining its productive blood, led into some dank fog nobody had daredto pierce, while people merely shrugged and said that life on earth could benothing but evil. And then I saw that the whole industrial establishment ofthe world, with all of its magnificent machinery, its thousand-ton furnaces,its transatlantic cables, its mahogany offices, its stock exchanges, itsblazing electric signs, its power, its wealth—all of it was run, not bybankers and boards of directors, but by any unshaved humanitarian in anybasement beer joint, by any face pudgy with malice, who preached that virtuemust be penalized for being virtue, that the purpose of ability is to serveincompetence, that man has no right to exist except for the sake of others. .. . I knew it. I saw no way to fight it. John found the way. There were just

the two of us with him, the night when we came to New York in answer to hiscall, Ragnar and I. He told us what we had to do and what sort of men we hadto reach. He had quit the Twentieth Century. He was living in a garret in aslum neighborhood. He stepped to the window and pointed at the skyscrapers ofthe city. He said that we had to extinguish the lights of the world, and whenwe would see the lights of New York go out, we would know that our job wasdone. He did not ask us to join him at once. He told us to think it over andto weigh everything it would do to our lives. I gave him my answer on themorning of the second day, and Ragnar a few hours later, in the afternoon. .. . Dagny, that was the morning after our last night together. I had seen, ina manner of vision that I couldn't escape, what it was that I had to fightfor.

It was for the way you looked that night, for the way you talked aboutyour railroad—for the way you had looked when we tried to see the skyline ofNew York from the top of a rock over the Hudson—I had to save you, to clearthe way for you, to let you find your city—not to let you stumble the yearsof your life away, struggling on through a poisoned fog, with your eyes stillheld straight ahead, still looking as they had looked in the sunlight,struggling on to find, at the end of your road, not the towers of a city, buta fat, soggy, mindless cripple performing his enjoyment of life by means ofswallowing the gin your life had gone to pay for! You,—to know no joy inorder that he may know it? You—to serve as fodder for the pleasure of others?You—as the means for the subhuman as the end? Dagny, that was what I saw andthat was what I couldn't let them do to you! Not to you, not to any child whohad your kind of look when-he faced the future, not to any man who had yourspirit and was able to experience a moment of being proudly, guiltlessly,confidently, joyously alive. That was my love, that state of the humanspirit, and I left you to fight for it, and I knew that if I were to loseyou, it was still you that I would be winning with every year of the battle.But you see it now, don't you? You've seen this valley. It's the place we setout to reach when we were children, you and I. We've reached it. What elsecan I ask for now? Just to see you here—did John say you're still a scab?—ohwell, it's only a matter of tune, but you'll be one of us, because you'vealways been, if you don't see it fully, we'll wait, I don't care-so long as you're alive, so long as I don't have to go on flying over theRockies, looking for the wreckage of your plane!"

She gasped a little, realizing why he had not come to the valley on time.He laughed. "Don't look like that. Don't look at me as if I were a woundthat you're afraid to touch."

"Francisco, I've hurt you in so many different ways—"

"No! No, you haven't hurt me—and he hasn't either, don't say anythingabout it, it's he who's hurt, but we'll save him and he'll come here, too,where he belongs, and he'll know, and then he, too, will be able to laughabout it. Dagny, I didn't expect you to wait, I didn't hope, I knew thechance I'd taken, and if it had to be anyone, I'm glad it's he."

She closed her eyes, pressing her lips together not to moan.

"Darling, don't! Don't you see that I've accepted it?"

But it isn't—she thought—it isn't he, and I can't tell you the truth,because it's a man who might never hear it from me and whom I might neverhave.

"Francisco, I did love you—" she said, and caught her breath, shocked,realizing that she had not intended to say it and, simultaneously, that thiswas not the tense she had wanted to use.

"But you do," he said calmly, smiling. "You still love me—even if there'sone expression of it that you'll always feel and want, but will not give meany longer. I'm still what I was, and you'll always see it, and you'll alwaysgrant me the same response, even if there's a greater one that you grant to

another man. No matter what you feel for him, it will not change what youfeel for me, and it won't be treason to either, because it comes from thesame root, it's the same payment in answer to the same values. No matter whathappens in the future, we'll always be what we were to each other, you and I,because you'll always love me."

"Francisco," she whispered, "do you know that?"

"Of course. Don't you understand it now? Dagny, every form of happiness isone, every desire is driven by the same motor—by our love for a single value,for the highest potentiality of our own existence—and every achievement is anexpression of it. Look around you. Do you see how much is open to us here, onan unobstructed earth? Do you see how much I am free to do, to experience, toachieve? Do you see that all of it is part of what you are to me—as I am partof it for you? And if I'll see you smile with admiration at a new coppersmelter that I built, it will be another form of what I felt when I lay inbed beside you. Will I want to sleep with you? Desperately. Will I envy theman who does? Sure. But what does that matter? It's so much—just to have youhere, to love you and to be alive."

Her eyes lowered, her face stern, holding her head bowed as in an act ofreverence, she said slowly, as if fulfilling a solemn promise, "Will youforgive me?"

He looked astonished, then chuckled gaily, remembering, and answered, "Notyet. There's nothing to forgive, but I'll forgive it when you join us."

He rose, he drew her to her feet—and when his arms closed about her, theirkiss was the summation of their past, its end and their seal of acceptance.

Gait turned to them from across the living room, when they came out. Hehad been standing at a window, looking at the valley—and she felt certainthat he had stood there all that time. She saw his eyes studying their faces,his glance moving slowly from one to the other.

His face relaxed a little at the sight of the change in Francisco's.

Francisco smiled, asking him, "Why do you stare at me?"

"Do you know what you looked like when you came in?"

"Oh, did I? That's because I hadn't slept for three nights. John, will youinvite me to dinner? I want to know how this scab of yours got here, but Ithink that I might collapse sound asleep in the middle of a sentence—eventhough right now I feel as if I'll never need any sleep at all—so I think I'dbetter go home and stay there till evening."

Gait was watching him with a faint smile. "But aren't you going to leavethe valley in an hour?"

"What? No . . ."he said mildly, in momentary astonishment. "No!"

he laughed exultantly. "I don't have to! That's right, I haven't told youwhat it was, have I? I was searching for Dagny. For . . . for the wreck ofher plane. She'd been reported lost in a crash in the Rockies."

"I see," said Gait quietly.

"I could have thought of anything, except that she would choose to crashin Gait's Gulch," Francisco said happily; he had the tone of that joyousrelief which almost relishes the horror of the past, defying it by means ofthe present. "I kept flying over the district between Afton, Utah, andWinston, Colorado, over every peak and crevice of it, over every remnant of acar in any gully below, and whenever I saw one, I—" He stopped; it lookedlike a shudder. "Then at night, we went out on foot—the searching parties ofrailroad men from Winston—

we went climbing at random, with no clues, no plan, on and on, until itwas daylight again, and—" He shrugged, trying to dismiss it and to smile. "Iwouldn't wish it on my worst—"

He stopped short; his smile vanished and a dim reflection of the look hehad worn for three days came back to his face, as if at the sudden presenceof an image he had forgotten.

After a long moment, he turned to Gait. "John," his voice soundedpeculiarly solemn, "could we notify those outside that Dagny is alive . . .in case there's somebody who . . . who'd feel as I did?"

Gait was looking straight at him. "Do you wish to give any outsider anyrelief from the consequences of remaining outside?"

Francisco dropped his eyes, but answered firmly, "No."

"Pity, Francisco?"

"Yes. Forget it. You're right."

Gait turned away with a movement that seemed oddly out of character: ithad the unrhythmical abruptness of the involuntary.

He did not turn back; Francisco watched him in astonishment, then askedsoftly, "What's the matter?"

Gait turned and looked at him for a moment, not answering. She could notidentify the emotion that softened the lines of Gait's face: it had thequality of a smile, of gentleness, of pain, and of something greater thatseemed to make these concepts superfluous.

"Whatever any of us has paid for this battle," said Gait, "you're the onewho's taken the hardest beating, aren't you?"

"Who? I?" Francisco grinned with shocked, incredulous amusement.

"Certainly not! What's the matter with you?" He chuckled and added, "Pity,John?"

"No," said Gait firmly.

She saw Francisco watching him with a faint, puzzled frown—because Gaithad said it, looking, not at him, but at her.

The emotional sum that struck her as an immediate impression ofFrancisco's house, when she entered it for the first time, was not the sumshe had once drawn from the sight of its silent, locked exterior. She felt,not a sense of tragic loneliness, but of invigorating brightness. The roomswere bare and crudely simple, the house seemed built with the skill, thedecisiveness and the impatience typical of Francisco; it looked like afrontiersman's shanty thrown together to serve as a mere springboard for along flight into the future—a future where so great a field of activity laywaiting that no time could be wasted on the comfort of its start. The placehad the brightness, not of a home, but of a fresh wooden scaffolding erectedto shelter the birth of a skyscraper.

Francisco, in shirt sleeves, stood in the middle of his twelve-foot squareliving room, with the look of a host in a palace. Of all the places where shehad ever seen him, this was the background that seemed most properly his.Just as the simplicity of his clothes, added to his bearing, gave him the airof a superlative aristocrat, so the crudeness of the room gave it theappearance of the most patrician retreat; a single royal touch was added tothe crudeness: two ancient silver goblets stood in a small niche cut in awall of bare logs; their ornate design had required the luxury of somecraftsman's long and costly labor, more labor than had gone to build theshanty, a design dimmed by the polish of more centuries than had gone to growthe log wall's pines. In the midst of that room, Francisco's easy, naturalmanner had a touch of quiet pride, as if his smile were silently saying toher: This is what I am and what I have been all these years.

She looked up at the silver goblets.

"Yes," he said, in answer to her silent guess, "they belonged to Sebastiand'Anconia and his wife. That's the only thing I brought here from my palacein Buenos Aires. That, and the crest over the door.

It's all I wanted to save. Everything else will go, in a very few monthsnow." He chuckled. "They'll seize it, all of it, the last dregs of d'AnconiaCopper, but they'll be surprised. They won't find much for their trouble. Andas to that palace, they won't be able to afford even its heating bill."

"And then?" she asked. "Where will you go from there?"

"I? I will go to work for d'Anconia Copper.""What do you mean?"

"Do you remember that old slogan: "The king is dead, long live the king'?When the carcass of my ancestors' property is out of the way, then my minewill become the young new body of d'Anconia Copper, the kind of property myancestors had wanted, had worked for, had deserved, but had never owned."

"Your mine? What mine? Where?"

"Here," he said, pointing toward the mountain peaks. "Didn't you know it?""No. "

"I own a copper mine that the looters won't reach. It's here, in thesemountains. I did the prospecting, I discovered it, I broke the firstexcavation. It was over eight years ago. I was the first man to whom Midassold land in this valley. I bought that mine. I started it with my own hands,as Sebastian d'Anconia had started. I have a superintendent 77!

in charge of it now, who used to be my best metallurgist in Chile.

The mine produces all the copper we require. My profits are deposited atthe Mulligan Bank. That will be all I'll have, a few months from now. Thatwill be all I'll need."

—to conquer the world, was the way his voice sounded on his last sentence—and she marveled at the difference between that sound and the shameful,mawkish tone, half-whine, half-threat, the tone of beggar and thug combined,which the men of their century had given to the word "need."

"Dagny," he was saying, standing at the window, as if looking out at thepeaks, not of mountains, but of time, "the rebirth of d'Anconia Copper—and ofthe world—has to start here, in the United States. This country was the onlycountry in history born, not of chance and blind tribal warfare, but as arational product of man's mind. This country was built on the supremacy ofreason—and, for one magnificent century, it redeemed the world. It will haveto do so again. The first step of d'Anconia Copper, as of any other humanvalue, has to come from here—because the rest of the earth has reached theconsummation of the beliefs it has held through the ages: mystic faith, thesupremacy of the irrational, which has but two monuments at the end of itscourse: the lunatic asylum and the graveyard. . . . Sebastian d'Anconiacommitted one error: he accepted a system which declared that the property hehad earned by right, was to be his, not by right, but by permission. Hisdescendants paid for that error. I have made the last payment. ... I thinkthat I will see the day when, growing out from their root in this soil, themines, the smelters, the ore docks of d'Anconia Copper will spread againthrough the world and down to my native country, and I will be the first tostart my country's rebuilding.

I may see it, but I cannot be certain. No man can predict the time whenothers will choose to return to reason. It may be that at the end of my life,I shall have established nothing but this single mine—

d'Anconia Copper No. 1, Gait's Gulch, Colorado, U.S.A. But, Dagny, do youremember that my ambition was to double my father's production of copper?Dagny, if at the end of my life, I produce but one pound of copper a year, Iwill be richer than my father, richer than all my ancestors with all theirthousands of tons—because that one pound will be mine by right and will beused to maintain a world that knows it!"

This was the Francisco of their childhood, in bearing, in manner, in theunclouded brilliance of his eyes—and she found herself questioning him abouthis copper mine, as she had questioned him about his industrial projects ontheir walks on the shore of the Hudson, recapturing the sense of anunobstructed future.

"I'll take you to see the mine," he said, "as soon as your ankle recoverscompletely. We have to climb a steep trail to get there, just a mule trail,there's no truck road as yet. Let me show you the new smelter I'm designing.

I've been working on it for some time, it's too complex for our presentvolume of production, but when the mine's output grows to justify it—justtake a look at the time, labor and money that it will save!"

They were sitting together on the floor, bending over the sheets of paperhe spread before her, studying the intricate sections of the smelter—with thesame joyous earnestness they had once brought to the study of scraps in ajunk yard.

She leaned forward just as he moved to reach for another sheet, and shefound herself leaning against his shoulder.-Involuntarily, she held still forone instant, no longer than for a small break in the flow of a single motion,while her eyes rose to his. He was looking down at her, neither hiding whathe felt nor implying any further demand. She drew back, knowing that she hadfelt the same desire as his.

Then, still holding the recaptured sensation of what she had felt for himin the past, she grasped a quality that had always been part of it, nowsuddenly clear to her for the first time: if that desire was a celebration ofone's life, then what she had felt for Francisco had always been acelebration of her future, like a moment of splendor gained in part paymentof an unknown, total, affirming some promise to come. In the instant when shegrasped it, she knew also the only desire she had ever experienced not intoken of the future but of the full and final present She knew it by means ofan image—the image of a man's figure standing at the door of a small granitestructure. The final form of the promise that had kept her moving, shethought, was the man who would, perhaps, remain a promise never to bereached.

But this—she thought in consternation—was that view of human destiny whichshe had most passionately hated and rejected: the view that man was ever tobe drawn by some vision of the unattainable shining ahead, doomed ever toaspire, but not to achieve. Her life and her values could not bring her tothat, she thought; she had never found beauty in longing for the impossibleand had never found the possible to be beyond her reach. But she had come toit and she could find no answer.

She could not give him up or give up the world—she thought, looking atGait, that evening. The answer seemed harder to find in his presence. Shefelt that no problem existed, that nothing could stand beside the fact ofseeing him and nothing would ever have the power to make her leave—and,simultaneously, that she would have no right to look at him if she were torenounce her railroad. She felt that she owned him, that the unnamed had beenunderstood between them from the start—and, simultaneously, that he was ableto vanish from her Me and, on some future street of the outside world, topass her by in unweighted indifference.

She noted that he did not question her about Francisco. When she spoke ofher visit, she could find no reaction in his face, neither of approval nor ofresentment. It seemed to her that she caught an imperceptible shading in hisgravely attentive expression: he looked as if this were a matter about whichhe did not choose to feel.

Her faint apprehension grew into a question mark, and the question markturned into a drill, cutting deeper and deeper into her mind through theevenings that followed—when Gait left the house and she remained alone. Hewent out every other night, after dinner, not telling her where he went,returning at midnight or later. She tried not to allow herself fully todiscover with what tension and. restlessness she waited for his return. Shedid not ask him where he spent his evenings. The reluctance that stopped herwas her too urgent desire to know; she kept silent in some dimly intentionalform of defiance, half in defiance of him, half of her own anxiety.

She would not acknowledge the things she feared or give them the solidshape of words, she knew them only by the ugly, nagging pull of an unadmitted

emotion. Part of it was a savage resentment, of a kind she had neverexperienced before, which was her answer to the dread that there might be awoman in his life; yet the resentment was softened by some quality of healthin the thing she feared, as if the threat could be fought and even, if needbe, accepted. But there was another, uglier dread: the sordid shape of self-sacrifice, the suspicion, not to be uttered about him, that he wished toremove himself from her path and let its emptiness force her back to the manwho was his best-loved friend.

Days passed before she spoke of it. Then, at dinner, on an evening when hewas to leave, she became suddenly aware of the peculiar pleasure sheexperienced while watching him eat the food she had prepared—and suddenly,involuntarily, as if that pleasure gave her a right she dared not identify,as if enjoyment, not pain, broke her resistance, she heard herself askinghim, "What is it you're doing every other evening?"

He answered simply, as if he had taken for granted that she knew it,"Lecturing."

"What?"

"Giving a course of lectures on physics, as I do every year during thismonth. It's my . . . What are you laughing at?" he asked, seeing the look ofrelief, of silent laughter that did not seem to be directed at his words—andthen, before she answered, he smiled suddenly, as if he had guessed theanswer, she saw some particular, intensely personal quality in his smile,which was almost a quality of insolent intimacy—in contrast to the calmlyimpersonal, casual manner with which he went on. "You know that this is themonth when we all trade the achievements of our real professions. RichardHalley is to give concerts, Kay Ludlow is to appear in two plays written byauthors who do not write for the outside world—and I give lectures, reportingon the work I've done during the year."

"Free lectures?"

"Certainly not. It's ten dollars per person for the course.""I want to hear you."

He shook his head. "No. You'll be allowed to attend the concerts, theplays or any form of presentation for your own enjoyment, but not my lecturesor any other sale of ideas which you might carry out of this valley. Besides,my customers, or students, are only those who have a practical purpose intaking my course: Dwight Sanders, Lawrence Hammond, Dick McNamara, OwenKellogg, a few others. I've added one beginner this year: Quentin Daniels."

"Really?" she said, almost with a touch of jealousy. "How can he affordanything that expensive?"

"On credit. I've given him a time-payment plan. He's worth it."

"Where do you lecture?"

"In the hangar, on Dwight Sanders' farm.""And where do you work during the year?""In my laboratory."

She asked cautiously, "Where is your laboratory? Here, in the valley?"He held her eyes for a moment, letting her see that his glance was amusedand that he knew her purpose, then answered, "No."

"You've lived in the outside world for all of these twelve years?""Yes."

"Do you"—the thought seemed unbearable—"do you hold some such job as theothers?"

"Oh yes." The amusement in his eyes seemed stressed by some specialmeaning.

"Don't tell me that you're a second assistant bookkeeper!"

"No, I'm not."

"Then what do you do?"

"I hold the kind of job that the world wishes me to hold."

"Where?"

He shook his head. "No, Miss Taggart. If you decide to leave the valley,this is one of the things that you are not to know."

He smiled again with that insolently personal quality which now seemed tosay that he knew the threat contained in his answer and what it meant to her,then he rose from the table.

When he had gone, she felt as if the motion of time were an oppressiveweight in the stillness of the house, like a stationary, half-solid massslithering slowly into some faint elongation by a tempo that left her nomeasure to know whether minutes had passed or hours. She lay half-stretchedin an armchair of the living room, crumpled by that heavy, indifferentlassitude which is not the will to laziness, but the frustration of the willto a secret violence that no lesser action can satisfy.

That special pleasure she had felt in watching him eat the food she hadprepared—she thought, lying still, her eyes closed, her mind moving, liketime, through some realm of veiled slowness—it had been the pleasure ofknowing that she had provided him with a sensual enjoyment, that one form ofhis body's satisfaction had come from her.

. . . There is reason, she thought, why a woman would wish to cook for aman . . . oh, not as a duty, not as a chronic career, only as a rare andspecial rite in symbol of . . . but what have they made of it, the preachersof woman's duty? . . . The castrated performance of a sickening drudgery washeld to be a woman's proper virtue—while that which gave it meaning andsanction was held as a shameful sin . . . the work of dealing with grease,steam and slimy peelings in a reeking kitchen was held to be a spiritualmatter, an act of compliance with her moral duty—while the meeting of twobodies in a bedroom was held to be a physical indulgence, an act of surrenderto an animal instinct, with no glory, meaning or pride of spirit to beclaimed by the animals involved.

She leaped abruptly to her feet. She did not want to think of the outerworld or of its moral code. But she knew that that was not the subject of herthoughts. And she did not want to think of the subject her mind was intent onpursuing, the subject to which it kept returning against her will, by somewill of its own. . . .

She paced the room, hating the ugly, jerky, uncontrolled looseness of hermovements—torn between the need to let her motion break the stillness, andthe knowledge that this was not the form of break she wanted. She lightedcigarettes, for an instant's illusion of purposeful action—and discarded themwithin another instant, feeling the weary distaste of a substitute purpose.She looked at the room like a restless beggar, pleading with physical objectsto give her a motive, wishing she could find something to clean, to mend, topolish—while knowing that no task was worth the effort. When nothing seemsworth the effort-said some stern voice in her mind—it's a screen to hide a wish that'sworth too much; what do you want? . . . She snapped a match, viciouslyjerking the flame to the tip of a cigarette she noticed hanging, unlighted,in the corner of her mouth. . . . What do you want?—repeated the voice thatsounded severe as a judge. I want him to come back!—she answered, throwingthe words, as a soundless cry, at some accuser within her, almost as onewould throw a bone to a pursuing beast, in the hope of distracting it frompouncing upon the rest.

I want him back—she said softly, in answer to the accusation that therewas no reason for so great an impatience. ... I want him back —she saidpleadingly, in answer to the cold reminder that her answer did not balancethe judge's scale. ... I want him back!—she cried defiantly, fighting notto drop' the one superfluous, protective word in that sentence.

She felt her head drooping with exhaustion, as after a prolonged beating.The cigarette she saw between her fingers had burned the mere length of halfan inch. She ground it out and fell into the armchair again.

I'm not evading it—she thought—I'm not evading it, it's just that I cansee no way to any answer. . . . That which you want—said the voice, while shestumbled through a thickening fog—is yours for the taking, but anything lessthan your full acceptance, anything less than your full conviction, is abetrayal of everything he is. . . . Then let him damn me—she thought, as ifthe voice were now lost in the fog and would not hear her—let him damn metomorrow. ... I want him . . . back. . . . She heard no answer, because herhead had fallen softly against the chair; she was asleep.

When she opened her eyes, she saw him standing three feet away, lookingdown at her, as if he had been watching her for some time.

She saw his face and, with the clarity of undivided perception, she sawthe meaning of the expression on his face: it was the meaning she had foughtfor hours. She saw it without astonishment, because she had not yet regainedher awareness of any reason why it should astonish her.

"This is the way you look, " he said softly, "when you fall asleep in youroffice," and she knew that he, too, was not fully aware of letting her hearit: the way he said it told her how often he had thought of it and for whatreason. "You look as if you would awaken in a world where you had nothing tohide or to fear," and she knew that the first movement of her face had been asmile, she knew it in the moment when it vanished, when she grasped that theywere both awake. He added quietly, with full awareness, "But here, it'strue. "

Her first emotion of the realm of reality was a sense of power. She sat upwith a flowing, leisurely movement of confidence, feeling the flow of themotion from muscle to muscle through her body. She asked, and it was theslowness, the sound of casual curiosity, the tone of taking the implicationsfor granted, that gave to her voice the faintest sound of disdain, "How didyou know what I look like in . . . my office?"

"I told you that I've watched you for years."

"How were you able to watch me that thoroughly? From where?"

"I will not answer you now," he said, simply, without defiance.

The slight movement of her shoulder leaning back, the pause, then thelower, huskier tone of her voice, left a hint of smiling triumph to trailbehind her words: "When did you see me for the first time?"

"Ten years ago," he answered, looking straight at her, letting her seethat he was answering the full, unnamed meaning of her question.

"Where?" The word was almost a command.

He hesitated, then she saw a faint smile that touched only his lips, nothis eyes, the kind of smile with which one contemplates—with longing,bitterness and pride—a possession purchased at an excruciating cost; his eyesseemed directed, not at her, but at the girl of that time.

"Underground, in the Taggart Terminal," he answered.

She became suddenly conscious of her posture: she had let her shoulderblades slide down against the chair, carelessly, half-lying, one legstretched forward—and with her sternly tailored, transparent blouse, her widepeasant skirt hand-printed in violent colors, her thin stocking and high-heeled pump, she did not look like a railroad executive—the consciousness ofit struck her in answer to his eyes that seemed to be seeing theunattainable—she looked like that which she was: his servant girl. She knewthe moment when some faintest stress of the brilliance in his dark green eyesremoved the veil of distance, replacing the vision of the past by the act ofseeing her immediate person.

She met his eyes with that insolent glance which is a smile withoutmovement of facial muscles.

He turned away, but as he moved across the room his steps were as eloquentas the sound of a voice. She knew that he wanted to leave the room, as healways left it, he had never stayed for longer than a brief good night whenhe came home. She watched the course of his struggle, whether by means of hissteps, begun in one direction and swerving in another, or by means of hercertainty that her body had become an instrument for the direct perception ofhis, like a screen reflecting both movements and motives—she could not tell.She knew only that he who had never started or lost a battle against himself,now had no power to leave this room.

His manner seemed to show no sign of strain. He took off his coat,throwing it aside, remaining in shirt sleeves, and sat down, facing her, atthe window across the room. But he sat down on the arm of a chair, as if hewere neither leaving nor staying.

She felt the light-headed, the easy, the almost frivolous sensation oftriumph in the knowledge that she was holding him as surely as by a physicaltouch; for the length of a moment, brief and dangerous to endure, it was amore satisfying form of contact.

Then she felt a sudden, blinding shock, which was half-blow, half screamwithin her, and she groped, stunned, for its cause—only to realize that hehad leaned a little to one side and it had been no more than the sight of anaccidental posture, of the long line running from his shoulder to the angleof his waist, to his hips, down his legs. She looked away, not to let him seethat she was trembling—and she dropped all thoughts of triumph and of whosewas the power.

"I've seen you many times since," he said, quietly, steadily, but a littlemore slowly than usual, as if he could control everything except his need tospeak.

"Where have you seen me?""Many places."

"But you made certain to remain unseen?" She knew that his was a face shecould not have failed to notice."Yes."

"Why? Were you afraid?""Yes."

He said it simply, and it took her a moment to realize that he wasadmitting he knew what the sight of his person would have meant to her. "Didyou know who I was, when you saw me for the first time?"

"Oh yes. My worst enemy but one."

"What?" She had not expected it; she added, more quietly, "Who's the worstone?"

"Dr. Robert Stadler."

"Did you have me classified with him?"

"No. He's my conscious enemy. He's the man who sold his soul. We don'tintend to reclaim him. You—you were one of us. I knew it, long before I sawyou. I knew also that you would be the last to join us and the hardest one todefeat. "

"Who told you that?"

"Francisco."

She let a moment pass, then asked, "What did he say?"

"He said that of all the names on our list, you'd be the one mostdifficult to win. That was when I heard of you for the first time. It wasFrancisco who put your name on our list. He told me that you were the solehope and future of Taggart Transcontinental, that you'd stand against us fora long time, that you'd fight a desperate battle for your railroad—becauseyou had too much endurance, courage and consecration to your work." Heglanced at her. "He told me nothing else.

He spoke of you as if he were merely discussing one of our futurestrikers. I knew that you and he had been childhood friends, that was all.""When did you see me?""Two years later.""How?"

"By chance. It was late at night . . . on a passenger platform of theTaggart Terminal." She knew that this was a form of surrender, he did notwant to say it, yet he had to speak, she heard both the muted intensity andthe pull of resistance in his voice—he had to speak, because he had to givehimself and her this one form of contact. "You wore an evening gown. You hada cape half-slipping off your body—I saw, at first, only your bare shoulders,your back and your profile—it looked for a moment as if the cape would slipfurther and you would stand there naked. Then I saw that you wore a longgown, the color of ice, like the tunic of a Grecian goddess, but had theshort hair and the imperious profile of an American woman. You lookedpreposterously out of place on a railroad platform—and it was not on arailroad platform that I was seeing you, I was seeing a setting that hadnever haunted me before—but then, suddenly, I knew that you did belong amongthe rails, the soot and the girders, that that was the proper setting for aflowing gown and naked shoulders and a face as alive as yours—a railroadplatform, not a curtained apartment—you looked like a symbol of luxury andyou belonged in the place that was its source—you seemed to bring wealth,grace, extravagance and the enjoyment of life back to their rightful owners,to the men who created railroads and factories—you had a look of energy andof its reward, together, a look of competence and luxury combined—and I wasthe first man who had ever stated in what manner these two were inseparable—and I thought that if our age gave form to its proper gods and erected astatue to the meaning of an American railroad, yours would be that statue. .. . Then I saw what you were doing—and I knew who you were. You were givingorders to three Terminal officials, I could not hear your words, but yourvoice sounded swift, clear-cut and confident. I knew that you were DagnyTaggart. I came closer, close enough to hear two sentences. 'Who said so?'asked one of the men. 'I did,' you answered. That was all I heard. That wasenough."

"And then?"

He raised his eyes slowly to hold hers across the room, and the submergedintensity that pulled his voice down, blurring its tone to softness, gave ita sound of self-mockery that was desperate and almost gentle: "Then I knewthat abandoning my motor was not the hardest price I would have to pay forthis strike."

She wondered which anonymous shadow—among the passengers who had hurriedpast her, as insubstantial as the steam of the engines and as ignored—whichshadow and face had been his; she wondered how close she had come to him forthe length of that unknown moment. "Oh, why didn't you speak to me, then orlater?"

"Do you happen to remember what you were doing in the Terminal thatnight?"

"I remember vaguely a night when they called me from some party I wasattending. My father was out of town and the new Terminal manager had madesome sort of error that tied up all traffic in the tunnels. The old managerhad quit unexpectedly the week before,"

"It was I who made him quit."

"I see ..."

Her voice trailed off, as if abandoning sound, as her eyelids dropped,abandoning sight. If he had not withstood it then—she thought—if he had cometo claim her, then or later, what( sort of tragedy would they have had to

reach? . . . She remembered what she had felt when she had cried that shewould shoot the destroyer on sight. . . .

I would have—the thought was not in words, she knew it only as a tremblingpressure in her stomach—I would have shot him, afterward, if I discovered hisrole . . . and I would have had to discover it . . .

and yet—she shuddered, because she knew she still wished he had come toher, because the thought not to be admitted into her mind.

but flowing as a dark warmth through her body, was: I would have shot him,but not before—

She raised her eyelids—and she knew that that thought was as naked to himin her eyes, as it was to her in his. She saw his veiled glance and thetautness of his mouth, she saw him reduced to agony, she felt herself drownedby the exultant wish to cause him pain, to see it, to watch it, to watch itbeyond her own endurance and his, then to reduce him to the helplessness ofpleasure.

He got up, he looked away, and she could not tell whether it was theslight lift of his head or the tension of his features that made his facelook oddly calm and clear, as if it were stripped of emotion down to thenaked purity of its structure.

"Every man that your railroad needed and lost in the past ten years,"

he said, "it was I who made you lose him." His voice had the single tonedflatness and the luminous simplicity of an accountant who reminds a recklesspurchaser that cost is an absolute which cannot be escaped, "I have pulledevery girder from under Taggart Transcontinental and, if you choose to goback, I will see it collapse upon your head."

He turned to leave the room. She stopped him. It was her voice, more thanher words, that made him stop: her voice was low, it had no quality ofemotion, only of a sinking weight, and its sole color was some draggingundertone, like an inner echo, resembling a threat; it was the voice of theplea of a person who still retains a concept of honor, but is long pastcaring for it: "You want to hold me here, don't you?"

"More than anything else in the world."

"You could hold me."

"I know it"

His voice had said it with the same sound as hers. He waited, to regainhis breath. When he spoke, his voice was low and clear, with some stressedquality of awareness, which was almost the quality of a smile ofunderstanding: "It's your acceptance of this place that I want. What goodwould it do me, to have your physical presence without any meaning? That'sthe kind of faked reality by which most people cheat themselves of theirlives. I'm not capable of it." He turned to go. "And neither are you. Goodnight, Miss Taggart."

He walked out, into his bedroom, closing the door.

She was past the realm of thought—as she lay in bed in the darkness of herroom, unable to think or to sleep—and the moaning violence that filled hermind seemed only a sensation of her muscles, but its tone and its twistingshades were like a pleading cry, which she knew, not as words, but as pain:Let him come here, let him break —let it be damned, all of it, my railroadand his strike and everything we've lived by!—let it be damned, everythingwe've been and are!—

he would, if tomorrow I were to die—then let me die, but tomorrow —let himcome here, be it any price he names, I have nothing left that's not for saleto him any longer—is this what it means to be an animal?—it does and I am. .. . She lay on her back, her palms pressed to the sheet at her sides, to stopherself from rising and walking into his room, knowing that she was capableeven of that. . . .

It's not I, it's a body I can neither endure nor control. . . . Butsomewhere within her, not as words, but as a radiant point of stillness,there was the presence of the judge who seemed to observe her, not in sterncondemnation any longer, but in approval and amusement, as if saying: Yourbody?—if he were not what you know him to be, would your body bring you tothis?—why is it his body that you want, and no other?—do you think that youare damning them, the things you both have lived by?—are you damning thatwhich you are honoring in this very moment, by your very desire? . . . Shedid not have to hear the words, she knew them, she had always known them.

. . . After a while, she lost the glow of that knowledge, and there wasnothing left but pain and the palms that were pressed to the sheet—and thealmost indifferent wonder whether he, too, was awake and fighting the sametorture.

She heard no sound in the house and saw no light from his window on thetree trunks outside. After a long while she heard, from the darkness of hisroom, two sounds that gave her a full answer; she knew that he was awake andthat he would not come; it was the sound of a step and the click of acigarette lighter.

Richard Halley stopped playing, turned away from the piano and glanced atDagny, He saw her drop her face with the involuntary movement of hiding toostrong an emotion, he rose, smiled and said softly, "Thank you."

"Oh no . . ." she whispered, knowing that the gratitude was hers and thatit was futile to express it. She was thinking of the years when the works hehad just played for her were being written, here, in his small cottage on aledge of the valley, when all this prodigal magnificence of sound was beingshaped by him as a flowing monument to a concept which equates the sense oflife with the sense of beauty—while she had walked through the streets of NewYork in a hopeless quest for some form of enjoyment, with the screeches of amodern symphony running after her, as if spit by the infected throat of aloud-speaker coughing its malicious hatred of existence.

"But I mean it," said Richard Halley, smiling. "I'm a businessman and Inever do anything without payment. You've paid me. Do you see why I wanted toplay for you tonight?"

She raised her head. He stood in the middle of his living room, they werealone, with the window open to the summer night, to the dark trees on a longsweep of ledges descending toward the glitter of the valley's distant lights.

"Miss Taggart, how many people are there to whom my work means as much asit does to you?"

"Not many," she answered simply, neither as boast nor flattery, but as animpersonal tribute to the exacting values involved.

"That is the payment I demand. Not many can afford it. I don't mean yourenjoyment, I don't mean your emotion—emotions be damned!—I mean yourunderstanding and the fact that your enjoyment was of the same nature asmine, that it came from the same source: from your intelligence, from theconscious judgment of a mind able to judge my work by the standard of thesame values that went to write it—I mean, not the fact that you felt, butthat you felt what I wished you to feel, not the fact that you admire mywork, but that you admire it for the things I wished to be admired." Hechuckled.

"There's only one passion in most artists more violent than their desirefor admiration: their fear of identifying the nature of such admiration asthey do receive. But it's a fear I've never shared. I do not fool myselfabout my work or the response I seek—I value both too highly.

I do not care to be admired causelessly, emotionally, intuitively,instinctively—or blindly, I do not care for blindness in any form, I have toomuch to show—or for deafness, I have too much to say. I do not care to beadmired by anyone's heart—only by someone's head. And when I find a customer

with that invaluable capacity, then my performance is a mutual trade tomutual profit. An artist is a trader, Miss Taggart, the hardest and mostexacting of all traders. Now do you understand me?"

"Yes," she said incredulously, "I do," incredulously because she washearing her own symbol of moral pride, chosen by a man she had least expectedto choose it.

"If you do, why did you look quite so tragic just a moment ago?What is it that you regret?"

"The years when your work has remained unheard."

"But it hasn't. I've given two or three concerts every year. Here, inGait's Gulch. I am giving one next week. I hope you'll come. The price ofadmission is twenty-five cents."

She could not help laughing. He smiled, then his face slipped slowly intoearnestness, as under the tide of some unspoken contemplation of his own. Helooked at the darkness beyond the window, at a spot where, in a clearing ofthe branches, with the moonlight draining its color, leaving only itsmetallic luster, the sign of the dollar hung like a curve of shining steelengraved on the sky.

"Miss Taggart, do you see why I'd give three dozen modern artists for onereal businessman? Why I have much more in common with Ellis Wyatt or KenDanagger—who happens to be tone deaf—than with men like Mort Liddy and BalphEubank? Whether it's a symphony or a coal mine, all work is an act ofcreating and comes from the same source: from an inviolate capacity to seethrough one's own eyes—which means: the capacity to perform a rationalidentification —which means: the capacity to sew, to connect and to makewhat had not been seen, connected and made before. That shining vision whichthey talk about as belonging to the authors of symphonies and novels—what dothey think is the driving faculty of men who discover how to use oil, how torun a mine, how to build an electric motor? That sacred fire which is said toburn within musicians and poets—what do they suppose moves an industrialistto defy the whole world for the sake of his new metal, as the inventors ofthe airplane, the builders of the railroads, the discoverers of new germs ornew continents have done through all the ages? . . . An intransigent devotionto the pursuit of truth, Miss Taggart? Have you heard the moralists and theart lovers of the centuries talk about the artist's intransigent devotion tothe pursuit of truth? Name me a greater example of such devotion than the actof a man who says that the earth does turn, or the act of a man who says thatan alloy of steel and copper has certain properties which enable it to docertain things, that it is and does—and let the world rack him or ruin him,he will not bear false witness to the evidence of his mind! This, MissTaggart, this sort of spirit, courage and love for truth—as against a sloppybum who goes around proudly assuring you that he has almost reached theperfection of a lunatic, because he's an artist who hasn't the faintest ideawhat his art work is or means, he's not restrained by such crude concepts as'being' or 'meaning' he's the vehicle of higher mysteries, he doesn't knowhow he created his work or why, it just came out of him spontaneously, likevomit out of a drunkard, he did not think, he wouldn't stoop to thinking, hejust felt it, all he has to do is feel-he feels, the flabby, loose-mouthed, shifty-eyed, drooling, shivering,uncongealed bastard! I, who know what discipline, what effort, what tensionof mind, what unrelenting strain upon one's power of clarity are needed toproduce a work of art—I, who know that it requires a labor which makes achain gang look like rest and a severity no army drilling sadist couldimpose—I'll take the operator of a coal mine over any walking vehicle ofhigher mysteries. The operator knows that it's not his feelings that keep thecoal carts moving under the earth—and he knows what does keep them moving.

Feelings? Oh yes, we do feel, he, you and I—we are, in fact, the only peoplecapable of feeling—

and we know where our feelings come from. But what we did not know andhave delayed learning for too long is the nature of those who claim that theycannot account for their feelings. We did not know what it is that they feel.We are learning it now. It was a costly error. And those most guilty of it,will pay the hardest price—as, in justice, they must. Those most guilty of itwere the real artists, who will now see that they are first to beexterminated and that they had prepared the triumph of their ownexterminators by helping to destroy their only protectors. For if there ismore tragic a fool than the businessman who doesn't know that he's anexponent of man's highest creative spirit—it's the artist who thinks that thebusinessman is his enemy."

It was true—she thought, when she walked through the streets of thevalley, looking with a child's excitement at the shop windows sparkling inthe sun—that the businesses here had the purposeful selectiveness of art—andthat the art—she thought, when she sat in the darkness of a clapboard concerthall, listening to the controlled violence and the mathematical precision ofHalley's music—had the stern discipline of business.

Both had the radiance of engineering—she thought, when she sat among rowsof benches under the open sky, watching Kay Ludlow on the stage. It was anexperience she had not known since childhood —the experience of being heldfor three hours by a play that told a story she had not seen before, in linesshe had not heard, uttering a theme that had not been picked from the hand-me-downs of the centuries. It was the forgotten delight of being held in raptattention by the reins of the ingenious, the unexpected, the logical, thepurposeful, the new—and of seeing it embodied in a performance of superlativeartistry by a woman playing a character whose beauty of spirit matched herown physical perfection.

"That's why I'm here, Miss Taggart," said Kay Ludlow, smiling in answer toher comment, after the performance. "Whatever quality of human greatness Ihave the talent to portray—that was the quality the outer world sought todegrade. They let me play nothing but symbols of depravity, nothing butharlots, dissipation-chasers and home-wreckers, always to be beaten at theend by the little girl next door, personifying the virtue of mediocrity. Theyused my talent—for the defamation of itself. That was why I quit."

Not since childhood, thought Dagny, had she felt that sense ofexhilaration after witnessing the performance of a play—the sense that lifeheld things worth reaching, not the sense of having studied some aspect of asewer there had been no reason to see. As the audience filed away into thedarkness from the lighted rows of benches, she noticed Ellis Wyatt, JudgeNarragansett, Ken Danagger, men who had once been said to despise all formsof art.

The last image she caught, that evening, was the sight of two tall,straight, slender figures walking away together down a trail among the rocks,with the beam of a spotlight flashing once on the gold of their hair. Theywere Kay Ludlow and Ragnar Danneskjold—and she wondered whether she couldbear to return to a world where these were the two doomed to destruction.

The recaptured sense of her own childhood kept coming back to her whenevershe met the two sons of the young woman who owned the bakery shop. She oftensaw them wandering down the trails of the valley—two fearless beings, agedseven and four. They seemed to face life as she had faced it. They did nothave the look she had seen in the children of the outer world—a look of fear,half-secretive, half sneering, the look of a child's defense against anadult, the look of a being in the process of discovering that he is hearinglies and of learning to feel hatred. The two boys had the open, joyous,friendly confidence of kittens who do not expect to get hurt, they had an

innocently natural, non-boastful sense of their own value and as innocent atrust in any stranger's ability to recognize it, they had the eager curiositythat would venture anywhere with the certainty that life held nothingunworthy of or closed to discovery, and they looked as if, should theyencounter malevolence, they would reject it contemptuously, not as dangerous,but as stupid, they would not accept it in bruised resignation as the law ofexistence, "They represent my particular career, Miss Taggart," said theyoung mother in answer to her comment, wrapping a loaf of fresh bread andsmiling at her across the counter. "They're the profession I've chosen topractice, which, in spite of all the guff about motherhood, one can'tpractice successfully in the outer world. I believe you've met my husband,he's the teacher of economics who works as linesman for Dick McNamara. Youknow, of course, that there can be no collective commitments in this valleyand that families or relatives are not allowed to come here, unless eachperson takes the striker's oath by his own independent conviction. I camehere, not merely for the sake of my husband's profession, but for the sake ofmy own. I came here in order to bring up my sons as human beings. I would notsurrender them to the educational systems devised to stunt a child's brain,to convince him that reason is impotent, that existence is an irrationalchaos with which he's unable to deal, and thus reduce him to a state ofchronic terror. You marvel at the difference between my children and thoseoutside, Miss Taggart? Yet the cause is so simple. The cause is that here, inGait's Gulch, there's no person who would not consider it monstrous ever toconfront a child with the slightest suggestion of the irrational."

She thought of the teachers whom the schools of the world had lost —whenshe looked at the three pupils of Dr. Akston, on the evening of their yearlyreunion.

The only other guest he had invited was Kay Ludlow. The six of them sat inthe back yard of his house, with the light of the sunset on their faces, andthe floor of the valley condensing into a soft blue vapor far below.

She looked at his pupils, at the three pliant, agile figures halfstretched on canvas chairs in poses of relaxed contentment, dressed inslacks, windbreakers and open-collared shirts: John Gait, Franciscod'Anconia, Ragnar Danneskjold.

"Don't be astonished, Miss Taggart," said Dr. Akston, smiling, "and don'tmake the mistake of thinking that these three pupils of mine are some sort ofsuperhuman creatures. They're something much greater and more astounding thanthat: they're normal men—a thing the world has never seen—and their feat isthat they managed to survive as such. It does take an exceptional mind and astill more exceptional integrity to remain untouched by the brain-destroyinginfluences of the world's doctrines, the accumulated evil of centuries—toremain human, since the human is the rational."

She felt some new quality in Dr. Akston's attitude, some change in thesternness of his usual reserve; he seemed to include her in their circle, asif she were more than a guest. Francisco acted as if her presence at theirreunion were natural and to be taken gaily for granted. Gait's face gave nohint of any reaction; his manner was that of a courteous escort who hadbrought her here at Dr. Akston's request.

She noticed that Dr. Akston's eyes kept coming back to her, as if with thequiet pride of displaying his students to an appreciative observer. Hisconversation kept returning to a single theme, in the manner of a father whohas found a listener interested in his most cherished subject: "You shouldhave seen them, when they were in college, Miss Taggart. You couldn't havefound three boys 'conditioned' to such different backgrounds, but—conditioners be damned!—they must have picked one another at first sight,among the thousands on that campus.

Francisco, the richest hen- in the world—Ragnar, the European aristocrat—and John, the self-made man, self-made in every sense, out of nowhere,penniless, parentless, tie-less. Actually, he was the son of a gas-stationmechanic at some forsaken crossroads in Ohio, and he had left home at the ageof twelve to make his own way—but I've always thought of him as if he hadcome into the world like Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, who sprang forthfrom Jupiter's head, fully grown and fully armed. ... I remember the daywhen I saw the three of them for the first time. They were sitting at theback of the classroom—I was giving a special course for postgraduatestudents, so difficult a course that few outsiders ever ventured to attendthese particular lectures. Those three looked too young even for freshmen—

they were sixteen at the time, as I learned later. At the end of thatlecture, John got up to ask me a question. It was a question which, as ateacher, I would have been proud to hear from a student who'd taken six yearsof philosophy. It was a question pertaining to Plato's metaphysics, whichPlato hadn't had the sense to ask of himself. I answered—and I asked John tocome to my office after the lecture.

He came—all three of them came—I saw the two others in my anteroom and letthem in. I talked to them for an hour—then I cancelled all my appointmentsand talked to them for the rest of the day. After which, I arranged to letthem take that course and receive their credits for it. They took the course.They got the highest grades in the class.

. . . They were majoring in two subjects: physics and philosophy.Their choice amazed everybody but me: modern thinkers considered itunnecessary to perceive reality, and modern physicists considered itunnecessary to think. I knew better; what amazed me was that these childrenknew it, too. . . . Robert Stadler was head of the Department of Physics, asI was head of the Department of Philosophy. He and I suspended all rules andrestrictions for these three students, we spared them all the routine,unessential courses, we loaded them with nothing but the hardest tasks, andwe cleared their way to major in our two subjects within their four years.They worked for it. And, during those four years, they worked for theirliving, besides. Francisco and Ragnar were receiving allowances from theirparents, John had nothing, but all three of them held part-time jobs to earntheir own experience and money. Francisco worked in a copper foundry, Johnworked in a railroad roundhouse, and Ragnar—no, Miss Taggart, Ragnar was notthe least, but the most studiously sedate of the three-he worked as clerk in the university library. They had time for everythingthey wanted, but no time for people or for any communal campus activities.They . . . Ragnar!" he interrupted himself suddenly, sharply. "Don't sit onthe ground! "

Danneskjold had slipped down and was now sitting on the grass, with hishead leaning against Kay Ludlow's knees. He rose obediently, chuckling. Dr.Akston smiled with a touch of apology.

"It's an old habit of mine," he explained to Dagny. "A 'conditioned'reflex, I guess. I used to tell him that in those college years, when I'dcatch him sitting on the ground in my back yard, on cold, foggy evenings—hewas reckless that way, he made me worry, he should have known it wasdangerous and—"

He stopped abruptly; he read in Dagny's startled eyes the same thought ashis own: the thought of the kind of dangers the adult Ragnar had chosen toface. Dr. Akston shrugged, spreading his hands in a gesture of helpless self-mockery. Kay Ludlow smiled at him in understanding.

"My house stood just outside the campus," he continued, sighing, "on atall bluff over Lake Erie. We spent many evenings together, the four of us.We would sit just like this, in my back yard, on the nights of early fall orin the spring, only instead of this granite mountainside, we had the spread

of the lake before us, stretching off into a peacefully unlimited distance. Ihad to work harder on those nights than in any classroom, answering all thequestions they'd ask me, discussing the kind of issues they'd raise. Aboutmidnight, I would fix some hot chocolate and force them to drink it—the onething I suspected was that they never took time to eat properly—and then we'dgo on talking, while the lake vanished into solid darkness and the sky seemedlighter than the earth. There were a few tunes when we stayed there till Inoticed suddenly that the sky was turning darker and the lake was growingpale and we were within a few sentences of daylight. I should have knownbetter, I knew that they weren't getting enough sleep as it was, but I forgotit occasionally, I lost my sense of time—

you see, when they were there, I always felt as ft it were early morningand a long, inexhaustible day were stretching ahead before us. They neverspoke of what they wished they might do in the future, they never wonderedwhether some mysterious omnipotence had favored them with some unknowabletalent to achieve the things they wanted—

they spoke of what they would do. Does affection tend to make one acoward? I know that the only times I felt fear were occasional moments when Ilistened to them and thought of what the world was becoming and what theywould have to encounter in the future. Fear?

Yes—but it was more than fear. It was the kind of emotion that makes mencapable of killing—when I thought that the purpose of the world's trend wasto destroy these children, that these three sons of mine were marked forimmolation. Oh yes, I would have killed—

but whom was there to kill? It was everyone and no one, there was nosingle enemy, no center and no villain, it was not the simpering socialworker incapable of earning a penny or the thieving bureaucrat scared of hisown shadow, it was the whole of the earth rolling into an obscenity ofhorror, pushed by the hand of every would-be decent man who believed thatneed is holier than ability, and pity is holier than justice. But these wereonly occasional moments. It was not my constant feeling. I listened to mychildren and I knew that nothing would defeat them. I looked at them, as theysat in my back yard, and beyond my house there were the tall, dark buildingsof what was still a monument to unenslaved thought—the Patrick HenryUniversity—

and farther in the distance there were the lights of Cleveland, the orangeglow of steel mills behind batteries of smokestacks, the twinkling red dotsof radio towers, the long white rays of airports on the black edge of thesky—and I thought that in the name of any greatness that had ever existed andmoved this world, the greatness of which they were the last descendants, theywould win, ... I remember one night when I noticed that John had beensilent for a long time —and I saw that he had fallen asleep, stretched thereon the ground.

The two others confessed that he had not slept for three days. I sent thetwo of them home at once, but I didn't have the heart to disturb him. It wasa warm spring night, I brought a blanket to cover him, and I let him sleepwhere he was. I sat there beside him till morning—and as I watched his facein the starlight, then the first ray of the sun on his untroubled foreheadand closed eyelids, what I experienced was not a prayer, I do not pray, butthat state of spirit at which a prayer is a misguided attempt: a full,confident, affirming self-dedication to my love of the right, to thecertainty that the right would win and that this boy would have the kind offuture he deserved." He moved his arm, pointing to the valley. "I did notexpect it to be as great as this—or as hard."

It had grown dark and the mountains had blended with the sky.

Hanging detached in space, there were the lights of the valley below them,the red breath of Stockton's foundry above, and the lighted string of windowsof Mulligan's house, like a railroad car imbedded in the sky.

"I did have a rival," said Dr. Akston slowly. "It was Robert Stadler.

. . . Don't frown, John—it's past. . . . John- did love him, once.

Well, so did I—no, not quite, but what one felt for a mind like Stadler'swas painfully close to love, it was that rarest of pleasures: admiration. No,I did not love him, but he and I had always felt as if we were fellowsurvivors from some vanishing age or land, in the gibbering swamp ofmediocrity around us. The mortal sin of Robert Stadler was that he neveridentified his proper homeland. ... He hated stupidity. It was the onlyemotion I had ever seen him display toward people—a biting, bitter, wearyhatred for any ineptitude that dared to oppose him. He wanted his own way, hewanted to be left alone to pursue it, he wanted to brush people out of hispath—

and he never identified the means to it or the nature of his path and ofhis enemies. He took a short cut. Are you smiling, Miss Taggart?

You hate him, don't you? Yes, you know the kind of short cut he took. . .. He told you that we were rivals for these three students.

That was true—or rather, that was not the way I thought of it, but I knewthat he did. Well, if we were rivals, I had one advantage: I knew why theyneeded both our professions; he never understood their interest in mine. Henever understood its importance to himself—

which, incidentally, is what destroyed him. But in those years he wasstill alive enough to grasp at these three students. 'Grasp' was the word forit. Intelligence being the only value he worshipped, he clutched them as ifthey were a private treasure of his own. He had always been a very lonelyman. I think that in the whole of his life, Francisco and Ragnar were hisonly love, and John was his only passion. It was John whom he regarded as hisparticular heir, as his future, as his own immortality. John intended to bean inventor, which meant that he was to be a physicist; he was to take hispostgraduate course under Robert Stadler. Francisco intended to leave aftergraduation and go to work; he was to be the perfect blend of both of us, histwo intellectual fathers: an industrialist. And Ragnar—you didn't know whatprofession Ragnar had chosen, Miss Taggart? No, it wasn't stunt pilot, orjungle explorer, or deep-sea diver. It was something much more courageousthan these. Ragnar intended to be a philosopher. An abstract, theoretical,academic, cloistered, ivory-tower philosopher. . . .

Yes, Robert Stadler loved them. And yet—I have said that I would havekilled to protect them, only there was no one to kill. If that were thesolution—which, of course, it isn't—the man to kill was Robert Stadler. Ofany one person, of any single guilt for the evil which is now destroying theworld—his was the heaviest guilt. He had the mind to know better. His was theonly name of honor and achievement, used to sanction the rule of the looters.He was the man who delivered science into the power of the looters' guns.John did not expect it. Neither did I. . . . John came back for hispostgraduate course in physics. But he did not finish it. He left, on the daywhen Robert Stadler endorsed the establishment of a State Science Institute.

I met Stadler by chance in a corridor of the university, as he came out ofhis office after his last conversation with John. He looked changed.

I hope that I shall never have to see again a change of that kind in aman's face. He saw me approaching—and he did not know, but I knew, what madehim whirl upon me and cry, Tin so sick of all of you Impractical idealists !1I turned away. I knew that I had heard a man pronounce a death sentence uponhimself. . . . Miss Taggart, do you remember the question you asked me aboutmy three pupils?"

"Yes," she whispered.

"I could gather, from your question, the nature of what Robert Stadler hadsaid to you about them. Tell me, why did he speak of them at all?"

He saw the faint movement of her bitter smile. "He told me their story asa justification for his belief in the futility of human intelligence. He toldit to me as an example of his disillusioned hope.

Theirs was the kind of ability, ' he said, 'one expects to see, in thefuture, changing the course of the world'."

"Well, haven't they done so?"

She nodded, slowly, holding her head inclined for a long moment hiacquiescence and in homage.

"What I want you to understand, Miss Taggart, is the full evil of thosewho claim to have become convinced that this earth, by its nature, is a realmof malevolence where the good has no chance to win. Let them check theirpremises. Let them check their standards of value. Let them check—before theygrant themselves the unspeakable license of evil-as-necessity—whether theyknow what is the good and what are the conditions it requires. Robert Stadlernow believes that intelligence is futile and that human life can be nothingbut irrational. Did he expect John Gait to become a great scientist, willingto work under the orders of Dr. Floyd Ferris? Did he expect Franciscod'Anconia to become a great industrialist, willing to produce under theorders and for the benefit of Wesley Mouch? Did he expect Ragnar Danneskjoldto become a great philosopher, willing to preach, under the orders of Dr.Simon Pritchett, that there is no mind and that might is right? Would thathave been a future which Robert Stadler would have considered rational? Iwant you to observe, Miss Taggart, that those who cry the loudest about theirdisillusionment, about the failure of virtue, the futility of reason, theimpotence of logic-are those who have achieved the full, exact, logical result of the ideasthey preached, so mercilessly logical that they dare not identify it. In aworld that proclaims the non-existence of the mind, the moral righteousnessof rule by brute force, the penalizing of the competent in favor of theincompetent, the sacrifice of the best to the worst —in such a world, thebest have to turn against society and have to become its deadliest enemies.In such a world John Gait, the man of incalculable intellectual power, willremain an unskilled laborer-Francisco d'Anconia, the miraculous producer of wealth, will become awastrel—and Ragnar Danneskjold, the man of enlightenment, will become the manof violence. Society—and Dr. Robert Stadler—have achieved everything theyadvocated. What complaint do they now have to make? That the universe isirrational? Is it?"

He smiled; his smile had the pitiless gentleness of certainty."Every man builds his world in his own image," he said. "He has the powerto choose, but no power to escape the necessity of choice.

If he abdicates his power, he abdicates the status of man, and thegrinding chaos of the irrational is what he achieves as his sphere ofexistence—by his own choice. Whoever preserves a single thought uncorruptedby any concession to the will of others, whoever brings into reality amatchstick or a patch of garden made in the image of his thought—he, and tothat extent, is a man, and that extent is the sole measure of his virtue.They"—he pointed at his pupils—

"made no concessions. This"—he pointed at the valley—"is the measure ofwhat they preserved and of what they are. . . . Now I can repeat my answer tothe question you asked me, knowing that you will understand it fully. Youasked me whether I was proud of the way my three sons had turned out. I ammore proud than I had ever hoped to be. I am proud of their every action, oftheir every goal—

and of every value they've chosen. And this, Dagny, is my full answer."

The sudden sound of her first name was pronounced in the tone of a father;he spoke his last two sentences, looking, not at her, but at Gait.

She saw Gait answering him by an open glance held steady for an instant,like a signal of affirmation. Then Gait's eyes moved to hers.

She saw him looking at her as if she bore the unspoken title that hung inthe silence between them, the title Dr. Akston had granted her, but had notpronounced and none of the others had caught—

she saw, in Gait's eyes, a glance of amusement at her shock, of supportand, incredibly, of tenderness.

D'Anconia Copper No. I was a small cut on the face of the mountain, thatlooked as if a knife had made a few angular slashes, leaving shelves of rock,red as a wound, on the reddish-brown flank.

The sun beat down upon it. Dagny stood at the edge of a path, holding onto Gait's arm on one side and to Francisco's on the other, the wind blowingagainst their faces and out over the valley, two thousand feet below.

This—she thought, looking at the mine—was the story of human wealthwritten across the mountains: a few pine trees hung over the cut, contortedby the storms that had raged through the wilderness for centuries, six menworked on the shelves, and an inordinate amount of complex machinery traceddelicate lines against the sky; the machinery did most of the work.

She noticed that Francisco was displaying his domain to Gait as much as toher, as much or more. "You haven't seen it since last year, John. . . . John,wait till you see it a year from now. I'll be through, outside, in just a fewmonths—and then this will be my full-time job."

"Hell, no, John!" he said, laughing, in answer to a question—but shecaught suddenly the particular quality of his glance whenever it rested onGait: it was the quality she had seen in his eyes when he had stood in herroom, clutching the edge of a table to outlive an unlivable moment; he hadlooked as if he were seeing someone before him; it was Gait, she thought; itwas Gait's image that had carried him through.

Some part of her felt a dim dread: the effort which Francisco had made inthat moment to accept her loss and his rival, as the payment demanded of himfor his battle, had cost him so much that he was now unable to suspect thetruth Dr. Akston had guessed. What will it do to him when he learns?—shewondered, and felt a bitter voice reminding her that there would, perhaps,never be any truth of this kind to learn.

Some part of her felt a dim tension as she watched the way Gait looked atFrancisco: it was an open, simple, unreserved glance of surrender to anunreserved feeling. She felt the anxious wonder she had never fully named ordismissed: wonder whether this feeling would bring him down to the uglinessof renunciation.

But most of her mind seemed swept by some enormous sense of release, as ifshe were laughing at all doubts. Her glance kept going back over the paththey had traveled to get here, over the two exhausting miles of a twistedtrail that ran, like a precarious corkscrew, from the tip of her feet down tothe floor of the valley. Her eyes kept studying it, her mind racing with somepurpose of its own.

Brush, pines and a clinging carpet of moss went climbing from the greenslopes far below, up the granite ledges. The moss and the brush vanishedgradually, but the pines went on, struggling upward in thinning strands, tillonly a few dots of single trees were left, rising up the naked rock towardthe white sunbursts of snow in the crevices at the peaks. She looked at thespectacle of the most ingenious mining machinery she had ever seen, then atthe trail where the plodding hoofs and swaying shapes of mules provided themost ancient form of transportation.

"Francisco, " she asked, pointing, "who designed the machines?"

"They're just adaptations of standard equipment."

"Who designed them?"

"I did. We don't have many men to spare. We had to make up for it."

"You're wasting an unconscionable amount of manpower and time, cartingyour ore on muleback. You ought to build a railroad down to the valley."

She was looking down and did not notice the sudden, eager shot of hisglance to her face or the sound of caution in his voice: "I know it, but it'ssuch a difficult job that the mine's output won't justify it at present."

"Nonsense! It's much simpler than it looks. There's a pass to the eastwhere there's an easier grade and softer stone, I watched it on the way up,it wouldn't take so many curves, three miles of rail or less would do it."

She was pointing east, she did not notice the intensity with which the twomen were watching her face.

"Just a narrow-gauge track is all you'11 need . . . like the firstrailroads . . . that's where the first railroads started—at mines, only theywere coal mines. . . . Look, do you see that ridge? There's plenty ofclearance for a three-foot gauge, you wouldn't need to do any blasting orwidening. Do you see where there's a slow rise for a stretch of almost half amile? That would be no worse than a four per cent grade, any engine couldmanage it." She was speaking with a swift, bright certainty, conscious ofnothing but the joy of performing her natural function in her natural worldwhere nothing could take precedence over the act of offering a solution to aproblem. "The road will pay for itself within three years. I think, at arough glance, that the costliest part of the job will be a couple of steeltrestles—and there's one spot where I might have to blast a tunnel, but it'sonly for a hundred feet or less. I'll need a steel trestle to throw the trackacross that gorge and bring it here, but it's not as hard as it looks—let meshow you, have you got a piece of paper?"

She did not notice with what speed Gait produced a notebook and a penciland thrust them into her hands—she seized them, as if she expected them to bethere, as if she were giving orders on a construction site where details ofthis kind were not to delay her.

"Let me give you a rough idea of what I mean. If we drive diagonal pilesinto the rock"—she was sketching rapidly—"the actual steel span would be onlysix hundred feet long—it would cut off this last half mile of your corkscrewturns—I could have the rail laid in three months and—"

She stopped. When she looked up at their faces, the fire had gone out ofhers. She crumpled her sketch and flung it aside into the red dust of thegravel. "Oh, what for?" she cried, the despair breaking out for the firsttime. "To build three miles of railroad and abandon a transcontinentalsystem!"

The two men were looking at her, she saw no reproach in their faces, onlya look of understanding which was almost compassion."I'm sorry," she said quietly, dropping her eyes.

"If you change your mind," said Francisco, "I'll hire you on the spot—orMidas will give you a loan in five minutes to finance that railroad, if youwant to own it yourself."

She shook her head. "I can't . . ." she whispered, "not yet . . ."

She raised her eyes, knowing that they knew the nature of her despair andthat it was useless to hide her struggle. "I've tried it once,"

she said. "I've tried to give it up . . .1 know what it will mean . . .

I'll think of it with every crosstie I'll see laid here, with every spikedriven . . . I'll think of that other tunnel and . . . and of Nat Taggart'sbridge. . . . Oh, if only I didn't have to hear about it! If only I couldstay here and never know what they're doing to the railroad, and never learnwhen it goes ! "

"You'll have to hear about it," said Gait; it was that ruthless tone,peculiarly his, which sounded implacable by being simple, devoid of any

emotional value, save the quality of respect for facts. "You'll hear thewhole course of the last agony of Taggart Transcontinental.

You'll hear about every wreck. You'll hear about every discontinued train.You'll hear about every abandoned line. You'll hear about the collapse of theTaggart Bridge. Nobody stays in this valley except by a full, consciouschoice based on a full, conscious knowledge of every fact involved in hisdecision. Nobody stays here by faking reality in any manner whatever."

She looked at him, her head lifted, knowing what chance he was rejecting.She thought that no man of the outer world would have said this to her atthis moment—she thought of the world's code that worshipped white lies as anact of mercy—she felt a stab of revulsion against that code, suddenly seeingits full ugliness for the first time-she felt an enormous pride for the tight, clean face of the man beforeher—he saw the shape of her mouth drawn firm in self-control, yet softened bysome tremulous emotion, while she answered quietly, "Thank you. You'reright."

"You don't have to answer me now," he said. "You'll tell me when you'vedecided. There's still a week left."

"Yes," she said calmly, "just one more week."

He turned, picked up her crumpled sketch, folded it neatly and slipped itinto his pocket.

"Dagny," said Francisco, "when you weigh your decision, consider the firsttime you quit, if you wish, but consider everything about it.

In this valley, you won't have to torture yourself by shingling roofs andbuilding paths that lead nowhere."

"Tell me," she asked suddenly, "how did you find out where I was, thattime?'1

He smiled. "It was John who told me. The destroyer, remember?You wondered why the destroyer had not sent anyone after you. But he had.It was he who sent me there.""He sent you?""Yes."

"What did he say to you?""Nothing much. Why?"

"What did he say? Do you remember the exact words?"

"Yes, I do remember. He said, 'If you want your chance, take it.

You've earned it.' I remember, because—" He turned to Gait with theuntroubled frown of a slight, casual puzzle. "John, I never quite understoodwhy you said it. Why that? Why—my chance?"

"Do you mind if I don't answer you now?"

"No, but-"

Someone hailed him from the ledges of the mine, and he went off swiftly,as if the subject required no further attention.

She was conscious of the long span of moments she took while turning herhead to Gait. She knew that she would find him looking at her. She could readnothing in his eyes, except a hint of derision, as if he knew what answer shewas seeking and that she would not find it in his face.

"You gave him a chance that you wanted?"

"I could have no chance till he'd had every chance possible to him.""How did you know what he had earned?"

"I had been questioning him about you for ten years, every time I could,in every way, from every angle. No, he did not tell me—it was the way hespoke of you that did. He didn't want to speak, but he spoke too eagerly,eagerly and reluctantly together—and then I knew that it had not been just achildhood friendship. I knew how much he had given up for the strike and howdesperately he hadn't given it up forever. I? I was merely questioning him

about one of our most important future strikers—as I questioned him aboutmany others,"

The hint of derision remained in his eyes; he knew that she had wanted tohear this, but that this was not the answer to the one question she feared.

She looked from his face to Francisco's approaching figure, not hidingfrom herself any longer that her sudden, heavy, desolate anxiety was the fearthat Gait might throw the three of them into the hopeless waste of self-sacrifice .

Francisco approached, looking at her thoughtfully, as if weighing somequestion of his own, but some question that gave a sparkle of reckless gaietyto his eyes.

"Dagny, there's only one week left," he said. "If you decide to go back,it will be the last, for a long time, " There was no reproach and no sadnessin his voice, only some softened quality as sole evidence of emotion. "If youleave now—oh yes, you'll still come back —but it won't be soon. And I—in afew months, I'll come to live here permanently, so if you go, I won't see youagain, perhaps for years.

I'd like you to spend this last week with me. I'd like you to move to myhouse. As my guest, nothing else, for no reason, except that I'd like youto. "

He said it simply, as if nothing were or could be hidden among the threeof them. She saw no sign of astonishment in Gait's face. She felt some swifttightening in her chest, something hard, reckless and almost vicious that hadthe quality of a dark excitement driving her blindly into action.

"But I'm an employee," she said, with an odd smile, looking at Gait, "Ihave a job to finish."

"I won't hold you to it," said Gait, and she felt anger at the tone of hisvoice, a tone that granted her no hidden significance and answered nothingbut the literal meaning of her words. "You can quit the job any time youwish. It's up to you."

"No, it isn't. I'm a prisoner here. Don't you remember? I'm to takeorders. I have no preferences to follow, no wishes to express, no decisionsto make. I want the decision to be yours."

"You want it to be mine?"

"Yes ! "

"You've expressed a wish."

The mockery of his voice was in its seriousness—and she threw at himdefiantly, not smiling, as if daring him to continue pretending that he didnot understand: "All right. That's what I wish!"

He smiled, as at a child's complex scheming which he had long since seenthrough. "Very well." But he did not smile, as he said, turning to Francisco,"Then-no."

The defiance toward an adversary who was the sternest of teachers, was allthat Francisco had read in her face. He shrugged, regretfully, but gaily."You're probably right. If you can't prevent her from going back—nobody can."

She was not hearing Francisco's words. She was stunned by the magnitude ofthe relief that hit her at the sound of Gait's answer, a relief that told herthe magnitude of the fear it swept away. She knew, only after it was over,what had hung for her on his decision; she knew that had his answer beendifferent, it would have destroyed the valley in her eyes.

She wanted to laugh, she wanted to embrace them both and laugh with themin celebration., it did not seem to matter whether she would stay here orreturn to the world, a week was like an endless span of time, either courseseemed flooded by an unchanging sunlight—and no struggle was hard, shethought, if this was the nature of existence. The relief did not come fromthe knowledge that he would not renounce her, nor from arty assurance that

she would win—the relief came from the certainty that he would always remainwhat he was.

"I don't know whether I'll go back to the world or not," she said soberly,but her voice was trembling with a subdued violence, which was pure gaiety."I'm sorry that I'm still unable to make a decision.

I'm certain of only one thing: that I won't be afraid to decide."

Francisco took the sudden brightness of her face as proof that theincident had been of no significance. But Gait understood; he glanced at herand the glance was part amusement, part contemptuous reproach.

He said nothing, until they were alone, walking down the trail to thevalley. Then he glanced at her again, the amusement sharper in his eyes, andsaid, "You had to put me to a test in order to learn whether I'd fall to thelowest possible stage of altruism?"

She did not answer, but looked at him in open, undefensive admission.

He chuckled and looked away, and a few steps later said slowly, in thetone of a quotation, "Nobody stays here by faking reality in any mannerwhatever."

Part of the intensity of her relief—she thought, as she walked silently byhis side—was the shock of a contrast: she had seen, with the sudden,immediate vividness of sensory perception, an exact picture of what the codeof self-sacrifice would have meant, if enacted by the three of them. Gait,giving up the woman he wanted, for the sake of his friend, faking hisgreatest feeling out of existence and himself out of her life, no matter whatthe cost to him and to her, then dragging the rest of his years through thewaste of the unreached and unfulfilled —she, turning for consolation to asecond choice, faking a love she did not feel, being willing to fake, sinceher will to self-deceit was the essential required for Gait's self-sacrifice,then living out her years in hopeless longing, accepting, as relief for anunhealing wound, some moments of weary affection, plus the tenet that love isfutile and happiness is not to be found on earth—Francisco, struggling in theelusive fog of a counterfeit reality, his life a fraud staged by the two whowere dearest to him and most trusted, struggling to grasp what was missingfrom his happiness, struggling down the brittle scaffold of a lie over theabyss of the discovery that he was not the man she loved, but only a resentedsubstitute, half-charity-patient, half-crutch, his perceptiveness becominghis danger and only his surrender to lethargic stupidity protecting theshoddy structure of his joy, struggling and giving up and settling into thedreary routine of the conviction that fulfillment is impossible to man—thethree of them, who had had all the gifts of existence spread out before them,ending up as embittered hulks, who cry in despair that life is frustration—the frustration of not being able to make unreality real.

But this—she thought—was men's moral code in the outer world, a code thattold them to act on the premise of one another's weakness, deceit andstupidity, and this was the pattern of their lives, this struggle through afog of the pretended and unacknowledged, this belief that facts are not solidor final, this state where, denying any form to reality, men stumble throughlife, unreal and unformed, and die having never been born. Here—she thought,looking down through green branches at the glittering roofs of the valley—onedealt with men as clear and firm as sun and rocks, and the immense light-heartedness of her relief came from the knowledge that no battle was hard, nodecision was dangerous where there was no soggy uncertainty, no shapelessevasion to encounter.

"Did it ever occur to you, Miss Taggart," said Gait, in the casual tone ofan abstract discussion, but as if he had known her thoughts, "that there isno conflict of interests among men, neither in business nor in trade nor intheir most personal desires—if they omit the irrational from their view ofthe possible and destruction from their view of the practical? There is no

conflict, and no call for sacrifice, and no man is a threat to the aims ofanother—if men understand that reality is an absolute not to be faked, thatlies do not work, that the unearned cannot be had, that the undeserved cannotbe given, that the destruction of a value which is, will not bring value tothat which isn't. The businessman who wishes to gain a market by throttling asuperior competitor, the worker who wants a share of his employer's wealth,the artist who envies a rival's higher talent—they're all wishing facts outof existence, and destruction is the only means of their wish. If they pursueit, they will not achieve a market, a fortune or an immortal fame—

they will merely destroy production, employment and art. A wish for theirrational is not to be achieved, whether the sacrificial victims are willingor not. But men will not cease to desire the impossible and will not losetheir longing to destroy—so long as self-destruction and self-sacrifice arepreached to them as the practical means of achieving the happiness of therecipients."

He glanced at her and added slowly, a slight emphasis as sole change inthe impersonal tone of his voice, "No one's happiness but my own is in mypower to achieve or to destroy. You should have had more respect for him andfor me than to fear what you had feared."

She did not answer, she felt as if a word would overfill the fullness ofthis moment, she merely turned to him with a look of acquiescence that wasdisarmed, childishly humble and would have been an apology but for itsshining joy, He smiled—in amusement, in understanding, almost in comradeshipof the things they shared and in sanction of the things she felt.

They went on in silence, and it seemed to her that this was a summer dayout of a carefree youth she had never lived, it was just a walk through thecountry by two people who were free for the pleasure of motion and sunlight,with no unsolved burdens left to carry. Her sense of lightness blended withthe weightless sense of walking downhill, as if she needed no effort to walk,only to restrain herself from flying, and she walked, fighting the speed ofthe downward pull, her body leaning back, the wind blowing her skirt like asail to brake her motion.

They parted at the bottom of the trail; he went to keep an appointmentwith Midas Mulligan, while she went to Hammond's Market with a list of itemsfor the evening's dinner as the sole concern of her world.

His wife—she thought, letting herself hear consciously the word Dr. Akstonhad not pronounced, the word she had long since felt, but never named—forthree weeks she had been his wife in every sense but one, and that final onewas still to be earned, but this much was real and today she could permitherself to know it, to feel it, to live with that one thought for this oneday.

The groceries, which Lawrence Hammond was lining up at her order on thepolished counter of his store, had never appeared to her as such shiningobjects—and, intent upon them, she was only half-conscious of some disturbingelement, of something that was wrong but that her mind was too full tonotice. She noticed it only when she saw Hammond pause, frown and stareupward, at the sky beyond his open store front.

In time with his words: "I think somebody's trying to repeat your stunt,Miss Taggart," she realized that it was the sound of an airplane overhead andthat it had been there for some time, a sound which was not to be heard inthe valley after the first of this month.

They rushed out to the street. The small silver cross of a plane wascircling above the ring of mountains, like a sparkling dragonfly about tobrush the peaks with its wings.

"What does he think he's doing?" said Lawrence Hammond.

There were people at the doors of the shops and standing still all downthe street, looking up.

"Is ... is anyone expected?" she asked and was astonished by the anxietyof her own voice.

"No," said Hammond. "Everyone who's got any business here is here." He didnot sound disturbed, but grimly curious.

The plane was now a small dash, like a silver cigarette, streaking againstthe flanks of the mountains: it had dropped lower.

"Looks like a private monoplane," said Hammond, squinting against the sun."Not an army model."

"Will the ray screen hold out?" she asked tensely, in a tone of defensiveresentment against the approach of an enemy.

He chuckled. "Hold out?"

"Will he see us?"

"That screen is safer than an underground vault, Miss Taggart. As youought to know."

The plane rose, and for a moment it was only a bright speck, like a bit ofpaper blown by the wind—it hovered uncertainly., then dropped down again intoanother circling spiral.

"What in hell is he after?" said Hammond.

Her eyes shot suddenly to his face.

"He's looking for something," said Hammond. "What?""Is there a telescope somewhere?"

"Why—yes, at the airfield, but—" He was about to ask what was the matterwith her voice—but she was running across the road, down the path to theairfield, not knowing that she was running, driven by a reason she had notime and no courage to name.

She found Dwight Sanders at the small telescope of the control tower; hewas watching the plane attentively, with a puzzled frown.

"Let me see it!" she snapped.

She clutched the metal tube, she pressed her eye to the lens, her handguiding the tube slowly to follow the plane—then he saw that her hand hadstopped, but her fingers did not open and her face remained bent over thetelescope, pressed to the lens, until he looked closer and saw that the lenswas pressed to her forehead.

"What's the matter, Miss Taggart?"

She raised her head slowly.

"Is it anyone you know, Miss Taggart?"

She did not answer. She hurried away, her steps rushing with thezigzagging aimlessness of uncertainty—she dared not run, but she had toescape, she had to hide, she did not know whether she was afraid to be seenby the men around her or by the plane above—the plane whose silver wings borethe number that belonged to Hank Rearden.

She stopped when she stumbled over a rock and fell and noticed that shehad been running. She was on a small ledge in the cliffs above the airfield,hidden from the sight of the town, open to the view of the sky. She rose, herhands groping for support along a granite wall, feeling the warmth of the sunon the rock under her palms—she stood, her back pressed to the wall, unableto move or to take her eyes off the plane.

The plane was circling slowly, dipping down, then rising again,struggling—she thought—as she had struggled, to distinguish the sight of awreck in a hopeless spread of crevices and boulders, an elusive spreadneither clear enough to abandon nor to survey. He was searching for the wreckof her plane, he had not given up, and whatever the three weeks of it hadcost him, whatever he felt, the only evidence he would give to the world andhis only answer was this steady, insistent, monotonous drone of a motorcarrying a fragile craft over every deadly foot of an inaccessible chain ofmountains.

Through the brilliant purity of the summer air, the plane seemedintimately close, she could see it rock on precarious currents and bank underthe thrusts of wind. She could see, and it seemed impossible that so clear asight was closed to his eyes. The whole of the valley lay below him, floodedby sunlight, flaming with glass panes and green lawns, screaming to be seen—the end of his tortured quest, the fulfillment of more than his wishes, notthe wreck of her plane and her body, but her living presence and his freedom-all that he was seeking or had ever sought was now spread open before him,open and waiting, his to be reached by a straight-line dive through the pure,clear air—

his and asking nothing of him but the capacity to see. "Hank!" shescreamed, waving her arms in desperate signal. "Hank!"

She fell back against the rock, knowing that she had no way to reach him,that she had no power to give him sight, that no power on earth could piercethat screen except his own mind and vision.

Suddenly and for the first time, she felt the screen, not as the mostintangible, but as the most grimly absolute barrier in the world.

Slumped against the rock, she watched, in silent resignation, the hopelesscircles of the plane's struggle and its motor's uncomplaining cry for help, acry she had no way to answer. The plane swooped down abruptly, but it wasonly the start of its final rise, it cut a swift diagonal across themountains and shot into the open sky. Then, as if caught in the spread of alake with no shores and no exit, it went sinking slowly and drowning out ofsight.

She thought, in bitter compassion, of how much he had failed to see.

And I?—she thought. If she left the valley, the screen would close for heras tightly, Atlantis would descend under a vault of rays more impregnablethan the bottom of the ocean, and she, too, would be left to struggle for thethings she had not known how to see, she, too, would be left to fight amirage of primordial savagery, while the reality of all that she desiredwould never come again within her reach, But the pull of the outer world, thepull that drew her to follow the plane, was not the image of Hank Rearden—sheknew that she could not return to him, even if she returned to the world—thepull was the vision of Hank Rearden's courage and the courage of all thosestill fighting to stay alive. He would not give up the search for her plane,when all others had long since despaired, as he would not give up his mills,as he would not give up any goal he had chosen if a single chance was left.Was she certain that no chance remained for the world of TaggartTranscontinental? Was she certain that the terms of the battle were such thatshe could not care to win? They were right, the men of Atlantis, they wereright to vanish if they knew that they left no value behind them—but untiland unless she saw that no chance was untaken and no battle unfought, she hadno right to remain among them. This was the question that had lashed her forweeks, but had not driven her to a glimpse of the answer.

She lay awake, through the hours of that night, quietly motionless,following—like an engineer and like Hank Rearden—a process of dispassionate,precise, almost mathematical consideration, with no regard for cost orfeeling. The agony which he lived in his plane, she lived it in a soundlesscube of darkness, searching, but finding no answer. She looked at theinscriptions on the walls of her room, faintly visible in patches ofstarlight, but the help those men had called in their darkest hour was nothers to call.

"Yes or no, Miss Taggart?"

She looked at the faces of the four men in the soft twilight of Mulligan'sliving room: Gait, whose face had the serene, impersonal attentiveness of ascientist—Francisco, whose face was made expressionless by the hint of asmile, the kind of smile that would fit either answer—

Hugh Akston who looked compassionately gentle—Midas Mulligan, who hadasked the question with no touch of rancor in his voice. Somewhere twothousand miles away, at this sunset hour, the page of a calendar wasspringing into light over the roofs of New York, saying: June 28—and itseemed to her suddenly that she was seeing it, as if it were hanging over theheads of these men.

"I have one more day," she said steadily. "Will you let me have it? Ithink I've reached my decision, but I am not fully certain of it and I'llneed all the certainty possible to me."

"Of course," said Mulligan. "You have, in fact, until morning of the dayafter tomorrow. We'll wait."

"We'll wait after that as well," said Hugh Akston, "though in yourabsence, if that be necessary."

She stood by the window, facing them, and she felt a moment's satisfactionin the knowledge that she stood straight, that her hands did not tremble,that her voice sounded as controlled, uncomplaining and unpitying as theirs;it gave her a moment's feeling of a bond to them.

"If any part of your uncertainty," said Gait, "is a conflict between yourheart and your mind—follow your mind."

"Consider the reasons which make us certain that we are right," said HughAkston, "but not the fact that we are certain. If you are not convinced,ignore our certainty. Don't be tempted to substitute our judgment for yourown, "

"Don't rely on our knowledge of what's best for your future," saidMulligan. "We do know, but it can't be best until you know it."

"Don't consider our interests or desires," said Francisco. "You have noduty to anyone but yourself."

She smiled, neither sadly nor gaily, thinking that none of it was the sortof advice she would have been given in the outer world. And knowing howdesperately they wished to help her where no help was possible, she felt itwas her part to give them reassurance.

"I forced my way here," she said quietly, "and I was to bearresponsibility for the consequences. I'm bearing it."

Her reward was to see Gait smile; the smile was like a military decorationbestowed upon her.

Looking away, she remembered suddenly Jeff Alien, the tramp aboard theComet, in the moment when she had admired him for attempting to tell her thathe knew where he was going, to spare her the burden of his aimlessness. Shesmiled faintly, thinking that she had now experienced it in both roles andknew that no action could be lower or more futile than for one person tothrow upon another the burden of his abdication of choice. She felt an oddcalm, almost a confident repose; she knew that it was tension, but thetension of a great clarity. She caught herself thinking: She's functioningwell in an emergency, I'll be all right with her—and realized that she wasthinking of herself.

"Let it go till day after tomorrow, Miss Taggart," said Midas Mulligan."Tonight you're still here."

"Thank you," she said.

She remained by the window, while they went on discussing the valley'sbusiness; it was their closing conference of the month. They had justfinished dinner—and she thought of her first dinner in this house a monthago; she was wearing, as she had then worn, the gray suit that belonged inher office, not the peasant skirt that had been so easy to wear hi the sun.I'm still here tonight, she thought, her hand pressed possessively to thewindow sill.

The sun had not yet vanished beyond the mountains, but the sky was aneven, deep, deceptively clear blue that blended with the blue of invisible

clouds into a single spread, hiding the sun; only the edges of the cloudswere outlined by a thin thread of flame, and it looked like a glowing,twisted net of neon tubing, she thought . . . like a chart of winding rivers. . . like . . . like the map of a railroad traced in white fire on the sky.

She heard Mulligan giving Gait the names of those who were not returningto the outer world. "We have jobs for all of them," said Mulligan. "In fact,there's only ten or twelve men who're going back this year—mostly to finishoff, convert whatever they own and come here permanently. I think this wasour last vacation month, because before another year is over we'll all beliving in this valley."

"Good," said Gait.

"We'll have to, from the way things are going outside.""Yes."

"Francisco," said Mulligan, "you'll come back in a few months?"

"In November at the latest," said Francisco. "I'll send you word by shortwave, when I'm ready to come back—will you turn the furnace on in my house?"

"I will," said Hugh Akston. "And I'll have your supper ready for you whenyou arrive."

"John, I take it for granted," said Mulligan, "that you're not returningto New York this time."

Gait took a moment to glance at him, then answered evenly, "I have notdecided it yet."

She noticed the shocked swiftness with which Francisco and Mulligan bentforward to stare at him—and the slowness with which Hugh Akston's glancemoved to his face; Akston did not seem to be astonished.

"You're not thinking of going back to that hell for another year, areyou?" said Mulligan.

"I am."

"But-good God, John!-what for?""I'll tell you, when I've decided."

"But there's nothing left there for you to do. We got everybody we knew ofor can hope to know of. Our list is completed, except for Hank Rearden—andwe'll get him before the year is over—and Miss Taggart, if she so chooses.That's all. Your job is done. There's nothing to look for, out there—exceptthe final crash, when the roof comes down on their heads."

"I know it."

"John, yours is the one head I don't want to be there when it happens.""You've never had to worry about me."

"But don't you realize what stage they're coming to? They're only one stepaway from open violence—hell, they've taken the step and sealed and declaredit long ago!—but in one more moment they'll see the full reality of whatthey've taken, exploding in their damned faces—plain, open, blind, arbitrary,blood shedding violence, running amuck, hitting anything and anyone atrandom. That's what I don't want to see you in the midst of."

"I can take care of myself."

"John, there's no reason for you to take the risk," said Francisco."What risk?"

"The looters are. worried about the men who've disappeared. They'resuspecting something. You, of all people, shouldn't stay there any longer.There's always a chance that they might discover just who and what you are."

"There's some chance. Not much."

"But there's no reason whatever to take it. There's nothing left thatRagnar and I can't finish."

Hugh Akston was watching them silently, leaning back in his chair; hisface had that look of intensity, neither quite bitterness nor quite a SOS

smile, with which a man watches a progression that interests him, but thatlags a few steps behind his vision.

"If I go back," said Gait, "it won't be for our work. It will be to winthe only thing I want from the world for myself, now that the work is done.I've taken nothing from the world and I've wanted nothing. But there's onething which it's still holding and which is mine and which I won't let ithave. No, I don't intend to break my oath, I won't deal with the looters, Iwon't be of any value or help to anyone out there, neither to looters norneutrals—nor scabs. If I go, it won't be for anyone's sake but mine—and Idon't think I'm risking my life, but if I am—well, I'm now free to risk it."

He was not looking at her, but she had to turn away and stand pressedagainst the window frame, because her hands were trembling.

"But, John!" cried Mulligan, waving his arm at the valley, "if anythinghappens to you, what would we—" He stopped abruptly and guiltily.

Gait chuckled. "What were you about to say?" Mulligan waved his handsheepishly, in a gesture of dismissal. "Were you about to say that ifanything happens to me, I'll die as the worst failure in the world?"

"All right," said Mulligan guiltily, "I won't say it. I won't say that wecouldn't get along without you—we can, I won't beg you to stay here for oursake—I didn't think I'd ever revert to that rotten old plea, but, boy!

—what a temptation it was, I can almost see why people do it. I know thatwhatever it is you want, if you wish to risk your life, that's all there isto it—but I'm thinking only that it's . . . oh God, John, it's such avaluable life!"

Gait smiled. "I know it. That's why I don't think I'm risking it—I thinkI'll win."

Francisco was now silent, he was watching Gait intently, with a frown ofwonder, not as if he had found an answer, but as if he had suddenly glimpseda question.

"Look, John," said Mulligan, "since you haven't decided whether you'll go—you haven't decided it yet, have you?""No, not yet."

"Since you haven't, would you let me remind you of a few things, just foryou to consider?""Go ahead."

"It's the chance dangers that I'm afraid of—the senseless, unpredictabledangers of a world falling apart. Consider the physical risks of complexmachinery in the hands of blind fools and fear-crazed cowards.

Just think of their railroads—you'd be taking a chance on some such horroras that Winston tunnel incident every time you stepped aboard a train—andthere will be more incidents of that kind, coming faster and faster. They'llreach the stage where no day will pass without a major wreck."

"I know it."

"And the same will be happening in every other industry, wherever machinesare used—the machines which they thought could replace our minds. Planecrashes, oil tank explosions, blast-furnace break-outs, high-tension wireelectrocutions, subway cave-ins and trestle collapses —they'll see them all.The very machines that had made their life so safe, will now make it acontinuous peril."

"I know it."

"I know that you know it, but have you considered it in every specificdetail? Have you allowed yourself to visualize it? I want you to see theexact picture of what it is that you propose to enter—before you decidewhether anything can justify your entering it. You know that the cities willbe hit worst of all. The cities were made by the railroads and will go withthem. "

"That's right."

"When the rails are cut, the city of New York will starve in two days.

That's all the supply of food it's got. It's fed by a continent threethousand miles long. How will they carry food to New York? By directive andoxcart? But first, before it happens, they'll go through the whole of theagony—through the shrinking, the shortages, the hunger riots, the stampedingviolence in the midst of the growing stillness."

"They will."

"They'll lose their airplanes first, then their automobiles, then theirtrucks, then their horse carts.""They will."

"Their factories will stop, then their furnaces and their radios. Thentheir electric light system will go.""It will."

"There's only a worn thread holding that continent together. There will beone train a day, then one train a week—then the Taggart Bridge will collapseand-"

"No, it won't!"

It was her voice and they whirled to her. Her face was white, but calmerthan it had been when she had answered them last.

Slowly, Gait rose to his feet and inclined his head, as in acceptance of averdict. "You've made your decision," he said.

"I have."

"Dagny," said Hugh Akston, "I'm sorry." He spoke softly, with effort, asif his words were struggling and failing to fill the silence of the room. "Iwish it were possible not to see this happen, I would have preferredanything—except to see you stay here by default of the courage of yourconvictions."

She spread her hands, palms out, her arms at her sides, in a gesture ofsimple frankness, and said, addressing them all, her manner so calm that shecould afford to show emotion, "I want you to know this: I have wished it werepossible for me to die in one more month, so that I could spend it in thisvalley. This is how much I've wanted to remain. But so long as I choose to goon living, I can't desert a battle which I think is mine to fight"

"Of course," said Mulligan respectfully, "if you still think it."

"If you want to know the one reason that's taking me back, 111 tell you; Icannot bring myself to abandon to destruction all the greatness of the world,all that which was mine and yours, which was made by us and is still ours byright—because I cannot believe that men can refuse to see, that they canremain blind and deaf to us forever, when the truth is ours and their livesdepend on accepting it. They still love their lives—and that is theuncorrupted remnant of their minds. So long as men desire to live, I cannotlose my battle."

"Do they?" said Hugh Akston softly. "Do they desire it? No, don't answerme now. I know that the answer was the hardest thing for any of us to graspand to accept. Just take that question back with you, as the last premiseleft for you to check."

"You're leaving as our friend," said Midas Mulligan, "and we'll befighting everything you'll do, because we know you're wrong, but it's not youthat we'll be damning."

"You'll come back," said Hugh Akston, "because yours is an error ofknowledge, not a moral failure, not an act of surrender to evil, but only thelast act of being victim to your own virtue. We'll wait for you—and, Dagny,when you come back, you will have discovered that there need never be anyconflict among your desires, nor so tragic a clash of values as the oneyou've borne so well."

"Thank you," she said, closing her eyes.

"We must discuss the conditions of your departure," said Gait; he spoke inthe dispassionate manner of an executive. "First, you must give us your wordthat you will not disclose our secret or any part of it—

neither our cause nor our existence nor this valley nor your whereaboutsfor the past month—to anyone in the outer world, not at any time or for anypurpose whatsoever."

"I give you my word."

"Second, you must never attempt to find this valley again. You are not tocome here uninvited. Should you break the first condition, it will not placeus in serious danger. Should you break the second—it will. It is not ourpolicy ever to be at the arbitrary mercy of the good faith of another person,or at the mercy of a promise that cannot be enforced. Nor can we expect youto place our interests above your own. Since you believe that your course isright, the day may come when you may find it necessary to lead our enemies tothis valley. We shall, therefore, leave you no means to do it. You will betaken out of the valley by plane, blindfolded, and you will be flown adistance sufficient to make it impossible for you ever to retrace thecourse. "

She inclined her head. "You are right."

"Your plane has been repaired. Do you wish to reclaim it by signing adraft on your account at the Mulligan Bank?""No. "

"Then we shall hold it, until such time as you choose to pay for it.Day after tomorrow, I will take you in my plane to a point outside thevalley and leave you within reach of further transportation."She inclined her head. "Very well."

It had grown dark, when they left Midas Mulligan's. The trail back toGait's house led across the valley, past Francisco's cabin, and the three ofthem walked home together. A few squares of lighted windows hung scatteredthrough the darkness, and the first streams of mist were weaving slowlyacross the panes, like shadows cast by a distant sea.

They walked in silence, but the sound of their steps, blending into asingle, steady beat, was like a speech to be grasped and not to be uttered inany other form.

After a while, Francisco said, "It changes nothing, it only makes the spana little longer, and the last stretch is always the hardest—but it's thelast. "

"I will hope so," she said. In a moment, she repeated quietly, "The lastis the hardest." She turned to Gait. "May I make one request?""Yes."

"Will you let me go tomorrow?""If you wish."

When Francisco spoke again, moments later, it was as if he were addressingthe unnamed wonder in her mind; his voice had the tone of answering, aquestion: "Dagny, all three of us are in love"—she jerked her head to him—"with the same thing, no matter what its forms. Don't wonder why you feel nobreach among us. You'll be one of us, so long as you'll remain in love withyour rails and your engines—and they'll lead you back to us, no matter howmany times you lose your way. The only man never to be redeemed is the manwithout passion."

"Thank you," she said softly.

"For what?"

"For . . . for the way you sound.""How do I sound? Name it, Dagny.""You sound . . . as if you're happy."

"I am—in exactly the same way you are. Don't tell me what you feel. I knowit. But, you see, the measure of the hell you're able to endure is the

measure of your love. The hell I couldn't bear to witness would be to see youbeing indifferent."

She nodded silently, unable to name as joy any part of the things shefelt, yet feeling that he was right.

Clots of mist were drifting, like smoke, across the moon, and in thediffused glow she could not distinguish the expressions of their faces, asshe walked between them: the only expressions to perceive were the straightsilhouettes of their bodies, the unbroken sound of then- steps and her ownfeeling that she wished to walk on and on, a feeling she could not define,except that it was neither doubt nor pain, When they approached his cabin,Francisco stopped, the gesture of his hand embracing them both as he pointedto his door. "Will you come in —since it's to be our last night together forsome time? Let's have a drink to that future of which all three of us arecertain."

"Are we?" she asked.

"Yes," said Gait, "we are."

She looked at their faces when Francisco switched on the light in hishouse. She could not define their expressions, it was not happiness or anyemotion pertaining to joy, their faces were taut and solemn, but it was aglowing solemnity—she thought—if this were possible, and the odd glow shefelt within her, told her that her own face had the same look.

Francisco reached for three glasses from a cupboard, but stopped, as at asudden thought. He placed one glass on the table, then reached for the twosilver goblets of Sebastian d'Anconia and placed them beside it.

"Are you going straight to New York, Dagny?" he asked, in the calm,unstrained tone of a host, bringing out a bottle of old wine, "Yes," sheanswered as calmly.

"I'm flying to Buenos Aires day after tomorrow," he said, uncorking thebottle. "I'm not sure whether I'll be back in New York later, but if I am, itwill be dangerous for you to see me."

"I won't care about that," she said, "unless you feel that I'm notentitled to see you any longer."

"True, Dagny. You're not. Not in New York."

He was pouring the wine and he glanced up at Gait. "John, when will youdecide whether you're going back or staying here?"

Gait looked straight at him, then said slowly, in the tone of a man whoknows all the consequences of his words, "I have decided, Francisco. I'mgoing back."

Francisco's hand stopped. For a long moment, he was seeing nothing butGait's face. Then his eyes moved to hers. He put the bottle down and he didnot step back, but it was as if his glance drew back to a wide range, toinclude them both, "But of course," he said.

He looked as if he had moved still farther and were now seeing the wholespread of their years; his voice had an even, uninflected sound, quality thatmatched the size of the vision.

"I knew it twelve years ago," he said. "I knew it before you could haveknown, and it's I who should have seen that you would see. That night, whenyou called us to New York, I thought of it then as"—he was speaking to Gait,but his eyes moved to Dagny—"as everything that you were seeking . . .everything you told us to live for or die, if

necessary. I should have seen that you would think it, too. It could nothave been otherwise. It is as it had—and ought—to be. It was set then, twelveyears ago." He looked at Gait and chuckled softly. "And you say that it's Iwho've taken the hardest beating?"

He turned with too swift a movement—then, too slowly, as if in deliberateemphasis, he completed the task of pouring the wine, filling the threevessels on the table. He picked up the two silver goblets, looked down at

them for the pause of an instant, then extended one to Dagny, the other toGait.

"Take it," he said. "You've earned it—and it wasn't chance."

Gait took the goblet from his hand, but it was as if the acceptance wasdone by their eyes as they looked at each other.

"I would have given anything to let it be otherwise," said Gait, "exceptthat which is beyond giving."

She held her goblet, she looked at Francisco and she let him see her eyesglance at Gait. "Yes," she said in the tone of an answer, "But I have notearned it—and what you've paid, I'm paying it now, and I don't know whetherI'll ever earn enough to hold clear title, but if hell is the price—and themeasure—then let me be the greediest of the three of us."

As they drank, as she stood, her eyes closed, feeling the liquid motion ofthe wine inside her throat, she knew that for all three of them this was themost tortured—and the most exultant—moment they had ever reached.

She did not speak to Gait, as they walked down the last stretch of thetrail to his house. She did not turn her head to him, feeling that even aglance would be too dangerous. She felt, in their silence, both the calm of atotal understanding and the tension of the knowledge that they were not toname the things they understood.

But she faced him, when they were in his living room, with full confidenceand as if in sudden certainty of a right—the certainty that she would notbreak and that it was now safe to speak. She said evenly, neither as plea noras triumph, merely as the statement of a fact, "You are going back to theouter world because I will be there."

"Yes."

"I do not want you to go.""You have no choice about it.""You are going for my sake.""No, for mine."

"Will you allow me to see you there?""No. "

"I am not to see you?""No. "

"I am not to know where you are or what you do?""You're not."

"Will you be watching me, as you did before?""More so."

"Is your purpose to protect me?""No. "

"What is it, then?"

"To be there on the day when you decide to join us."

She looked at him attentively, permitting herself no other reaction, butas if groping for an answer to the first point she had not fully understood.

"All the rest of us will be gone," he explained. "It will become toodangerous to remain. I will remain as your last key, before the door of thisvalley closes altogether."

"Oh!" She choked it off before it became a moan. Then, regaining themanner of impersonal detachment, she asked, "Suppose I were to tell you thatmy decision is final and that I am never to join you?"

"It would be a lie."

"Suppose I were now to decide that I wish to make it final and to stand byit, no matter what the future?"

"No matter what future evidence you observe and what convictions youform?"

"Yes."

"That would be worse than a lie."

"You are certain that I have made the wrong decision?""I am."

"Do you believe that one must be responsible for one's own errors?""I do."

"Then why aren't you letting me bear the consequences of mine?""I am and you will."

"If I find, when it is too late, that I want to return to this valley —whyshould you have to bear the risk of keeping that door open to me?"

"I don't have to. I wouldn't do it if I had no selfish end to gain.""What selfish end?""I want you here."

She closed her eyes and inclined her head in open admission of defeat-defeat in the argument and in her attempt to face calmly the full meaning ofthat which she was leaving.

Then she raised her head and, as if she had absorbed his kind offrankness, she looked at him, hiding neither her suffering nor her longingnor her calm, knowing that all three were in her glance.

His face was as it had been in the sunlight of the moment when she hadseen it for the first time: a face of merciless serenity and unflinchingperceptiveness, without pain or fear or guilt. She thought that were itpossible for her to stand looking at him, at the straight lines of hiseyebrows over the dark green eyes, at the curve of the shadow underscoringthe shape of his mouth, at the poured-metal planes of his skin in the opencollar of his shirt and the casually immovable posture of his legs—she wouldwish to spend the rest of her life on this spot and in this manner. And inthe next instant she knew that if her wish were granted, the contemplationwould lose all meaning, because she would have betrayed all the things thatgave it value.

Then, not as memory, but as an experience of the present, she felt herselfreliving the moment when she had stood at the window of her room in New York,looking at a fogbound city, at the unattainable shape of Atlantis sinking outof reach—and she knew that she was now seeing the answer to that moment. Shefelt, not the words she had then addressed to the city, but that untranslatedsensation from which the words had come: You, whom I have always loved andnever found, you whom I expected to see at the end of the rails beyond thehorizon—

Aloud, she said, "I want you to know this. I started my life with a singleabsolute: that the world was mine to shape in the image of my highest valuesand never to be given up to a lesser standard, no matter how long or hard thestruggle"—you whose presence I had always felt in the streets of the city,the wordless voice within her was saying, and whose world I had wanted tobuild—"Now I know that I was fighting for this valley"—it is my love for youthat had kept me moving—"It was this valley that I saw as possible and wouldexchange for nothing less and would not give up to a mindless evil"—my loveand my hope to reach you and my wish to be worthy of you on the day when Iwould stand before you face to face—"I am going back to fight for thisvalley—to release it from its underground, to regain for it its full andrightful realm, to let the earth belong to you in fact, as it does in spirit—and to meet you again on the day when I'm able to deliver to you the whole ofthe world—or, if I fail, to remain in exile from this valley to the end of mylife"—but what is left of my life will still be yours, and I will go on inyour name, even though it is a name I'm never to pronounce, I will go onserving you, even though I'm never to win, I will go on, to be worthy of youon the day when I would have met you, even though I won't—"I will fight forit, even if I have to fight against you, even if you damn me as a traitor . .. even if I am never to see you again."

He had stood without moving, he had listened with no change in his face,only his eyes had looked at her as if he were hearing every word, even thewords she had not pronounced. He answered, with the same look, as if the lookwere holding some circuit not yet to be broken, his voice catching some toneof hers, as if in signal of the same code, a voice with no sign of emotionexcept in the spacing of the words: "If you fail, as men have failed in theirquest for a vision that should have been possible, yet has remained foreverbeyond their reach—if, like them, you come to think that one's highest valuesare not to be attained and one's greatest vision is not to be made real-don ' t damn this earth, as they did. don't damn existence. You have seenthe Atlantis they were seeking, it is here, it exists—but one must enter itnaked and alone, with no rags from the falsehoods of centuries, with thepurest clarity of mind—not an innocent heart, but that which is much rarer:an intransigent mind—as one's only possession and key. You will not enter ituntil you learn that you do not need to convince or to conquer the world.When you learn it, you will see that through all the years of your struggle,nothing had barred you from Atlantis and there were no chains to hold you,except the chains you were willing to wear. Through all those years, thatwhich you most wished to win was waiting for you"—he looked at her as if hewere speaking to the unspoken words in her mind—"waiting as unremittingly asyou were fighting, as passionately, as desperately—but with a greatercertainty than yours. Go out to continue your struggle. Go on carryingunchosen burdens, taking undeserved punishment and believing that justice canbe served by the offer of your own spirit to the most unjust of tortures. Butin your worst and darkest moments, remember that you have seen another kindof world. Remember that you can reach it whenever you choose to see. Rememberthat it will be waiting and that it's real, it's possible—it's yours."

Then, turning his head a little, his voice as clear, but his eyes breakingthe circuit, he asked, "What time do you wish to leave tomorrow?""Oh . . . ! As early as it will be convenient for you.""Then have breakfast ready at seven and we'll take off at eight.""I will."

He reached into his pocket and extended to her a small, shining disk whichshe could not distinguish at first. He dropped it on the palm of her hand: itwas a five-dollar gold piece.

"The last of your wages for the month," he said.

Her fingers snapped closed over the coin too tightly, but she answeredcalmly and tonelessly, "Thank you.""Good night, Miss Taggart.""Good night."

She did not sleep in the hours that were still left to her. She sat on thefloor of her room, her face pressed to the bed, feeling nothing but the senseof his presence beyond the wall. At times, she felt as if he were before her,as if she were sitting at his feet. She spent her last night with him in thismanner.

She left the valley as she had come, carrying away nothing that belongedto it. She left the few possessions she had acquired—her peasant skirt, ablouse, an apron, a few pieces of underwear—folded neatly in a drawer of thechest in her room. She looked at them for a moment, before she closed thedrawer, thinking that if she came back, she would, perhaps, still find themthere. She took nothing with her but the five-dollar gold piece and the bandof tape still wound about her ribs.

The sun touched the peaks of the mountains, drawing a shining circle as afrontier of the valley—when she climbed aboard the plane.

She leaned back in the seat beside him and looked at Gait's face bent overher, as it had been bent when she had opened her eyes on the first morning.

Then she closed her eyes and felt his hands tying the blindfold across herface.

She heard the blast of the motor, not as sound, but as the shudder of anexplosion inside her body; only it felt like a distant shudder, as if theperson feeling it would have been hurt if she were not so far away.

She did not know when the wheels left the ground or when the plane crossedthe circle of the peaks. She lay still, with the pounding beat of the motoras her only perception of space, as if she were carried inside a current ofsound that rocked once in a while. The sound came from his engine, from thecontrol of his hands on the wheel; she held onto that; the rest was to beendured, not resisted.

She lay still, her legs stretched forward, her hands on the arms of theseat, with no sense of motion, not even her own, to give her a sense of time,with no space, no sight, no future, with the night of closed eyelids underthe pressure of the cloth—and with the knowledge of his presence beside heras her single, unchanging reality, They did not speak. Once, she saidsuddenly, "Mr. Gait."

"Yes?"

"No. Nothing. I just wanted to know whether you were still there.""I will always be there."

She did not know for how many miles the memory of the sound of wordsseemed like a small landmark rolling away into the distance, then vanishing.Then there was nothing but the stillness of an indivisible present.

She did not know whether a day had passed or an hour, when she felt thedownward, plunging motion which meant that they were about to land or tocrash; the two possibilities seemed equal to her mind.

She felt the jolt of the wheels against the ground as an oddly delayedsensation: as if some fraction of time had gone to make her believe it.

She felt the running streak of jerky motion, then the jar of the stop andof silence, then the touch of his hands on her hair, removing the blindfold.

She saw a glaring sunlight, a stretch of scorched weeds going off into thesky, with no mountains to stop it, a deserted highway and the hazy outline ofa town about a mile away. She glanced at her watch: forty seven minutes ago,she had still been in the valley.

"You'll find a Taggart station there," he said, pointing at the town, "andyou'll be able to take a train."

She nodded, as if she understood.

He did not follow her as she descended to the ground. He leaned across thewheel toward the open door of the plane, and they looked at each other. Shestood, her face raised to him, a faint wind stirring her hair, the straightline of her shoulders sculptured by the trim suit of a business executiveamidst the flat immensity of an empty prairie.

The movement of his hand pointed east, toward some invisible cities.

"Don't look for me out there," he said. "You will not find me—until youwant me for what I am. And when you'll want me, I'll be the easiest man tofind."

She heard the sound of the door falling closed upon him; it seemed louderthan the blast of the propeller that followed. She watched the run of theplane's wheels and the trail of weeds left flattened behind them.

Then she saw a strip of sky between wheels and weeds.

She looked around her. A reddish haze of heat hung over the shapes of thetown in the distance, and the shapes seemed to sag under a rusty tinge; abovetheir roofs, she saw the remnant of a crumbled smokestack. She saw a dry,yellow scrap rustling faintly in the weeds beside her: it was a piece ofnewspaper. She looked at these objects blankly, unable to make them real.

She raised her eyes to the plane. She watched the spread of its wings growsmaller in the sky, draining away in its wake the sound of its motor. It kept

rising, wings first, like a long silver cross; then the curve of its motionwent following the sky, dropping slowly closer to the earth; then it seemednot to move any longer, but only to shrink. She watched it like a star in theprocess of extinction, while it shrank from cross to dot to a burning sparkwhich she was no longer certain of seeing. When she saw that the spread ofthe sky was strewn with such sparks all over, she knew that the plane wasgone.

CHAPTER IIIANTI-GREED

"What am I doing here?" asked Dr. Robert Stadler. "Why was I asked to comehere? I demand an explanation. I'm not accustomed to being dragged halfwayacross a continent without rhyme, reason or notice."

Dr, Floyd Ferris smiled. "Which makes me appreciate it all the more thatyou did come, Dr. Stadler." It was impossible to tell whether his voice had atone of gratitude—or of gloating.

The sun was beating down upon them and Dr. Stadler felt a streak ofperspiration oozing along his temple. He could not hold an angrily,embarrassingly private discussion in the middle of a crowd streaming to fillthe benches of the grandstand around them—the discussion which he had triedand failed to obtain for the last three days. It occurred to him that thatwas precisely the reason why his meeting with Dr. Ferris had been delayed tothis moment; but he brushed the thought aside, just as he brushed some insectbuzzing to reach his wet temple.

"Why was I unable to get in touch with you?" he asked. The fraudulentweapon of sarcasm now seemed to sound less effective than ever, but it wasDr. Stadler's only weapon: "Why did you find it necessary to send me messageson official stationery worded in a style proper, I'm sure, for Army"—orders,he was about to say, but didn't—"communications, but certainly not forscientific correspondence?"

"It is a government matter," said Dr. Ferris gently.

"Do you realize that I was much too busy and that this meant aninterruption of my work?"

"Oh yes," said Dr. Ferris noncommittally.

"Do you realize that I could have refused to come?"

"But you didn't," said Dr. Ferris softly.

"Why was I given no explanation? Why didn't you come for me in person,instead of sending those incredible young hooligans with their mysteriousgibberish that sounded half-science, half-pulp-magazine?"

"I was too busy," said Dr. Ferris blandly.

"Then would you mind telling me what you're doing in the middle of a plainin Iowa—and what I'm doing here, for that matter?" He waved contemptuously atthe dusty horizon of an empty prairie and at the three wooden grandstands.The stands were newly erected, and the wood, too, seemed to perspire; hecould see drops of resin sparkling in the sun.

"We are about to witness an historical event, Dr. Stadler. An occasionwhich will become a milestone on the road of science, civilization, socialwelfare and political adaptability." Dr. Ferris' voice had the tone of apublic relations man's memorized handout. "The turning point of a new era."

"What event? What new era?"

"As you will observe, only the most distinguished citizens, the cream ofour intellectual elite, have been chosen for the special privilege ofwitnessing this occasion. We could not omit your name, could we?—and we feelcertain, of course, that we can count on your loyalty and cooperation."

He could not catch Dr. Ferris' eyes. The grandstands were rapidly fillingwith people, and Dr. Ferris kept interrupting himself constantly to wave tonondescript newcomers, whom Dr. Stadler had never seen before, but who werepersonages, as he could tell by the particular shade of gaily informaldeference in Ferns' waving. They all seemed to know Dr. Ferris and to seekhim out, as if he were the master of ceremonies —or the star—of the occasion.

"If you would kindly be specific for a moment," said Dr. Stadler, "andtell me what—"

"Hi, Spud!" called Dr. Ferris, waving to a portly, white-haired man whofilled the full-dress uniform of a general.

Dr. Stadler raised his voice: "I said, if you would kindly concentratelong enough to explain to me what in hell is going on—"

"But it's very simple. It's the final triumph of . . . You'll have toexcuse me a minute, Dr. Stadler," said Dr. Ferris hastily, tearing forward,like an over trained lackey at the sound of a bell, in the direction of whatlooked like a group of aging rowdies; he turned back long enough to add twowords which he seemed reverently to consider as a full explanation: "Thepress ! "

Dr. Stadler sat down on the wooden bench, feeling unaccountably reluctantto brush against anything around him. The three grandstands were spaced atintervals in a semi-curve, like the tiers of a small, private circus, withroom for some three hundred people; they seemed built for the viewing of somespectacle—but they faced the emptiness of a flat prairie stretching off tothe horizon, with nothing in sight but the dark blotch of a farmhouse milesaway.

There were radio microphones in front of one stand, which seemed reservedfor the press. There was a contraption resembling a portable switchboard infront of the stand reserved for officials; a few levers of polished metalsparkled in the sun on the face of the switchboard. In an improvised parkinglot behind the stands, the glitter of luxurious new cars seemed a brightlyreassuring sight. But it was the building that stood on a knoll some thousandfeet away that gave Dr. Stadler a vague sense of uneasiness. It was a small,squat structure of unknown purpose, with massive stone walls, no windowsexcept a few slits protected by stout iron bars, and a large dome,grotesquely too heavy for the rest, that seemed to press the structure downinto the soil. A few outlets protruded from the base of the dome, in loose,irregular shapes, resembling badly poured clay funnels; they did not seem tobelong to an industrial age or to any known usage. The building had an air ofsilent malevolence, like a puffed, venomous mushroom; it was obviouslymodern, but its sloppy, rounded, ineptly unspecific lines made it look like aprimitive structure unearthed in the heart of the jungle, devoted to somesecret rites of savagery.

Dr. Stadler sighed with irritation; he was tired of secrets."Confidential" and "Top Confidential" had been the words stamped on theinvitation which had demanded that he travel to Iowa on a two-day notice andfor an unspecified purpose. Two young men, who called themselves physicists,had appeared at the Institute to escort him; his calls to Ferris' office inWashington had remained unanswered. The young men had talked—through anexhausting trip by government plane, then a clammy ride in a government ear-about science, emergencies, social equilibriums and the need of secrecy, tillhe knew less than he had known at the start; he noticed only that two wordskept recurring in their jabber, which had also appeared in the text of theinvitation, two words that had an ominous sound when involving an unknownissue: the demands for his "loyalty" and "co-operation."

The young men had deposited him on a bench in the front row of thegrandstand and had vanished, like the folding gear of a mechanism, leavinghim to the sudden presence of Dr. Ferris in person. Now, watching the scenearound him, watching Dr. Ferris' vague, excited, loosely casual gestures inthe midst of a group of newsmen, he had an impression of bewilderingconfusion, of senseless, chaotic inefficiency—and of a smooth machine workingto produce the exact degree of that impression needed at the exact moment.

He felt a single, sudden flash of panic, in which, as in a flash oflightning, he permitted himself to know that he felt a desperate desire toescape. But he slammed his mind shut against it. He knew that the darkestsecret of the occasion—more crucial, more untouchable, more deadly than

whatever was hidden in the mushroom building—was that which had made himagree to come.

He would never have to learn his own motive, he thought; he thought it,not by means of words, but by means of the brief, vicious spasm of an emotionthat resembled irritation and felt like acid. The words that stood in hismind, as they had stood when he had agreed to come, were like a voodooformula which one recites when it is needed and beyond which one must notlook: What can you do when you have to deal with people?

He noticed that the stand reserved for those whom Ferris had called theintellectual elite was larger than the stand prepared for governmentofficials. He caught himself feeling a swift little sneak of pleasure at thethought that he had been placed in the front row. He turned to glance at thetiers behind him. The sensation he experienced was like a small, gray shock:that random, faded, shopworn assembly was not his conception of anintellectual elite. He saw defensively belligerent men and tastelesslydressed women—he saw mean, rancorous, suspicious faces that bore the one markincompatible with a standard bearer of the intellect: the mark ofuncertainty. He could find no face he knew, no face to recognize as famousand none likely ever to achieve such recognition.

He wondered by what standard these people had been selected.

Then he noticed a gangling figure in the second row, the figure of anelderly man with a long, slack face that seemed faintly familiar to him,though he could recall nothing about it, except a vague' memory, as of aphotograph seen in some unsavory publication. He leaned toward a woman andasked, pointing, "Could you tell me. the name of that gentleman?" The womananswered in a whisper of awed respect, "That is Dr. Simon Pritchett!" Dr.Stadler turned away, wishing no one would see him, wishing no one would everlearn that he had been a member of that group.

He raised his eyes and saw that Ferris was leading the whole press gangtoward him. He saw Ferris sweeping his arm at him, in the manner of a touristguide, and declaring, when they were close enough to be heard, "But whyshould you waste your time on me, when there is the source of today'sachievement, the man who made it all possible—

Dr. Robert Stadler!"

It seemed to him for an instant that he saw an incongruous look on theworn, cynical faces of the newsmen, a look that was not quite respect,expectation or hope, but more like an echo of these, like a faint reflectionof the look they might have worn in their youth on hearing the name of RobertStadler. In that instant, he felt an impulse which he would not acknowledge:the impulse to tell them that he knew nothing about today's event, that hispower counted for less than theirs, that he had been brought here as a pawnin some confidence game, almost as . . . as a prisoner.

Instead, he heard himself answering their questions in the smug,condescending tone of a man who shares all the secrets of the highestauthorities: "Yes, the State Science Institute is proud of its record ofpublic service. . . . The State Science Institute is not the tool of anyprivate interests or personal greed, it is devoted to the welfare of mankind,to the good of humanity as a whole—" spouting, like a dictaphone, thesickening generalities he had heard from Dr. Ferns.

He would not permit himself to know that what he felt was self loathing;he identified the emotion, but not its object; it was loathing for the menaround him, he thought; it was they who were forcing him to go through thisshameful performance. What can you do—he thought—

when you have to deal with people?

The newsmen were making brief notes of his answers. Their faces now hadthe look of automatons acting out the routine of pretending that they werehearing news in the empty utterances of another automaton.

"Dr. Stadler, " asked one of them, pointing at the building on the knoll,"is it true that you consider Project X the greatest achievement of the StateScience Institute?"

There was a dead drop of silence.

"Project ... X ... ?" said Dr. Stadler.

He knew that something was ominously wrong in the tone of his voice,because he saw the heads of the newsmen go up, as at the sound of an alarm;he saw them waiting, their pencils poised.

For one instant, while he felt the muscles of his face cracking into thefraud of a smile, he felt a formless, an almost supernatural terror, as if hesensed again the silent working of some smooth machine, as if he were caughtin it, part of it and doing its irrevocable will. "Project X?" he saidsoftly, in the mysterious tone of a conspirator. "Well, gentlemen, the value—and the motive—of any achievement of the State Science Institute are not tobe doubted, since it is a non-profit venture—need I say more?"

He raised his head and noticed that Dr. Ferris had stood on the edge ofthe group through the whole of the interview. He wondered whether he imaginedthat the look on Dr. Ferris' face now seemed less tense—and more impertinent.

Two resplendent cars came shooting at full speed into the parking lot andstopped with a flourish of screeching brakes. The newsmen deserted him in themiddle of a sentence and went running to meet the group alighting from thecars.

Dr. Stadler turned to Ferris. "What is Project X?" he asked sternly.Dr. Ferris smiled in a manner of innocence and insolence together."A non-profit venture, " he answered—and went running off to meet thenewcomers.

From the respectful whispers of the crowd, Dr. Stadler learned that thelittle man in a wilted linen suit, who looked like a shyster, stridingbriskly in the center of the new group, was Mr. Thompson, the Head of theState. Mr. Thompson was smiling, frowning and barking answers to the newsmen.Dr. Ferris was weaving through the group, with the grace of a cat rubbingagainst sundry legs.

The group came closer and he saw Ferris steering them in his direction."Mr. Thompson," said Dr. Ferris sonorously, as they approached, "may Ipresent Dr. Robert Stadler?"

Dr. Stadler saw the little shyster's eyes studying him for the fraction ofa second: the eyes had a touch of superstitious awe, as at the sight of aphenomenon from a mystical realm forever incomprehensible to Mr. Thompson—andthey had the piercing, calculating shrewdness of a ward heeler who feelscertain that nothing is immune from his standards, a glance like the visualequivalent of the words: What's your angle?

"It's an honor, Doctor, an honor, I'm sure," said Mr. Thompson briskly,shaking his hand.

He learned that the tall, stoop-shouldered man with a crew haircut was Mr.Wesley Mouch. He did not catch the names of the others, whose hands he shook.As the group proceeded toward the officials'

grandstand, he was left with the burning sensation of a discovery he darednot face: the discovery that he had felt anxiously pleased by the littleshyster's nod of approval.

A party of young attendants, who looked like movie theater ushers,appeared- from, somewhere with handcarts of glittering objects, which theyproceeded to distribute to the assembly. The objects were field glasses. Dr.Ferns took his place at the microphone of a public-address system by theofficials' stand. At a signal from Wesley Mouch, his voice boomed suddenlyover the prairie, an unctuous, fraudulently solemn voice magnified by themicrophone inventor's ingenuity into the sound and power of a giant: "Ladiesand gentlemen . . . !"

The crowd was struck into silence, all heads jerking unanimously towardthe graceful figure of Dr. Floyd Ferris.

"Ladies and gentlemen, you have been chosen—in recognition of yourdistinguished public service and social loyalty—to witness the unveiling of ascientific achievement of such tremendous importance, such staggering scope,such epoch-making possibilities that up to this moment it has been known onlyto a very few and only as Project X."

Dr. Stadler focused his field glasses on the only thing in sight—on theblotch of the distant farm.

He saw that it was the deserted ruin of a farmhouse, which had obviouslybeen abandoned years ago. The light of the sky showed through the naked ribsof the roof, and jagged bits of glass framed the darkness of empty windows.He saw a sagging barn, the rusted tower of a water wheel, and the remnant ofa tractor lying upturned with its treads in the air.

Dr. Ferris was talking about the crusaders of science and about the yearsof selfless devotion, unremitting toil and persevering research that had goneinto Project X.

It was odd—thought Dr. Stadler, studying the ruins of the farm-that there should be a herd of goats in the midst of such desolation.There were six or seven of them, some drowsing, some munching

lethargically at whatever grass they could find among the sun-scorched weeds."Project X," Dr. Ferris was saying, "was devoted to some special research

in the field of sound. The science of sound has astonishing aspects, which

laymen would scarcely suspect. ..."

Some fifty feet away from the farmhouse, Dr. Stadler saw a structure,

obviously new and of no possible purpose whatever: it looked like a few spans

of a steel trestle, rising into empty space, supporting nothing, leading

nowhere.

Dr. Ferris was now talking about the nature of sound vibrations.

Dr. Stadler aimed his field glasses at the horizon beyond the farm, butthere was nothing else to be seen for dozens of miles. The sudden, strainingmotion of one of the goats brought his eyes back to the herd.

He noticed that the goats were chained to stakes driven at intervals intothe ground.

". . . And it was discovered," said Dr. Ferris, "that there are certainfrequencies of sound vibration which no structure, organic or inorganic, canwithstand. . . ."

Dr. Stadler noticed a silvery spot bouncing over the weeds among the herd.It was a kid that had not been chained; it kept leaping and weaving about itsmother.

". . . The sound ray is controlled by a panel inside the giant undergroundlaboratory," said Dr. Ferris, pointing at the building on the knoll. "Thatpanel is known to us affectionately as the 'Xylophone'—

because one must be darn careful to strike the right keys, or, rather, topull the right levers. For this special occasion, an extension Xylophone,connected to the one inside, has been erected here"—he pointed to theswitchboard in front of the officialsl stand—"so that you may witness theentire operation and see the simplicity of the whole procedure. . . ."

Dr. Stadler found pleasure in watching the kid, a soothing, reassuringkind of pleasure. The little creature seemed barely a week old, it lookedlike a ball of white fur with graceful long legs, it kept bounding in amanner of deliberate, gaily ferocious awkwardness, all four of its legs heldstiff and straight. It seemed to be leaping at the sunrays, at the summerair, at the joy of discovering its own existence.

". . . The sound ray is invisible, inaudible and fully controllable inrespect to target, direction and range. Its first public test, which you areabout to witness, has been set to cover a small sector, a mere two miles, in

perfect safety, with all space cleared for twenty miles beyond. The presentgenerating equipment in our laboratory is capable of producing rays to cover-through the outlets which you may observe under the dome—the entirecountryside within a radius of a hundred miles, a circle with a peripheryextending from the shore of the Mississippi, roughly from the bridge of theTaggart Transcontinental Railroad, to Des Moines and Fort Dodge, Iowa, toAustin, Minnesota, to Woodman, Wisconsin, to Rock Island, Illinois. This isonly a modest beginning. We possess the technical knowledge to buildgenerators with a range of two and three hundred miles—but due to the factthat we were unable to obtain in time a sufficient quantity of a highly heatresistant metal, such as Rearden Metal, we had to be satisfied with ourpresent equipment and radius of control. In honor of our great executive, Mr.Thompson, under whose far-sighted administration the State Science Institutewas granted the funds without which Project X would not have been possible,this great invention will henceforth be known as the Thompson Harmonizer!"

The crowd applauded. Mr. Thompson sat motionless, with his face held self-consciously stiff. Dr. Stadler felt certain that this small-time shyster hadhad as little to do with the Project as any of the movie usher attendants,that he possessed neither the mind nor the initiative nor even the sufficientdegree of malice to cause a new gopher trap to be brought into the world,that he, too, was only the pawn of a silent machine—a machine that had nocenter, no leader, no direction, a machine that had not been set in motion byDr. Ferris or Wesley Mouch, or any of the cowed creatures in the grandstands,or any of the creatures behind the scenes—an impersonal, unthinking,unembodied machine, of which none was the driver and all were the pawns, eachto the degree of his evil. Dr. Stadler gripped the edge of the bench: he felta desire to leap to his feet and run.

". . . As to the function and the purpose of the sound ray, I shall saynothing. I shall let it speak for itself. You will now see it work.

When Dr. Blodgett pulls the levers of the Xylophone, I suggest that youkeep your eyes on the target—which is that farmhouse two miles away. Therewill be nothing else to see. The ray itself is invisible. It has long beenconceded by all progressive thinkers that there are no entities, onlyactions—and no values, only consequences. Now, ladies and gentlemen, you willsee the action and the consequences of the Thompson Harmonizer."

Dr. Ferris bowed, walked slowly away from the microphone and came to takehis seat on the bench beside Dr. Stadler.

A youngish, fattish kind of man took his stand by the switchboard—

and raised his eyes expectantly toward Mr. Thompson. Mr. Thompson lookedblankly bewildered for an instant, as if something had slipped his mind,until Wesley Mouch leaned over and whispered some word into his ear."Contact!" said Mr. Thompson loudly.

Dr. Stadler could not bear to watch the graceful, undulating, effeminatemotion of Dr. Blodgett's hand as it pulled the first lever of theswitchboard, then the next. He raised his field glasses and looked at thefarmhouse.

In the instant when he focused his lens, a goat was pulling at its chain,reaching placidly for a tall, dry thistle. In the next instant, the goat roseinto the air, upturned, its legs stretched upward and jerking, then fell intoa gray pile made of seven goats in convulsions. By the time Dr. Stadlerbelieved it, the pile was motionless, except for one beast's leg sticking outof the mass, stiff as a rod and shaking as in a strong wind. The farmhousetore into strips of clapboard and went down, followed by a geyser of thebricks of its chimney. The tractor vanished into a pancake. The water towercracked and its shreds hit the ground white its wheel was still describing along curve through the air, as if of its own leisurely volition. The steelbeams and girders of the solid new trestle collapsed like a structure of

matchsticks under the breath of a sigh. It was so swift, so uncontested, sosimple, that Dr.

Stadler felt no horror, he felt nothing, it was not the reality he hadknown, it was the realm of a child's nightmare where material objects couldbe dissolved by means of a single malevolent wish.

He moved the field glasses from his eyes. He was looking at an emptyprairie. There was no farm, there was nothing in the distance except adarkish strip that looked like the shadow of a cloud.

A single, high, thin scream rose from the tiers behind him, as some womanfainted. He wondered why she should scream so long after the fact-and then herealized that the time elapsed since the touch of the first lever was not afull minute.

He raised his field glasses again, almost as if he were suddenly hopingthat the cloud shadow would be all he would see. But the material objectswere still there; they were a mount of refuse. He moved his glasses over thewreckage; in a moment, he realized that he was looking for the kid. He couldnot find it; there was nothing but a pile of gray fur.

When he lowered the glasses and turned, he found Dr. Ferns looking at him.He felt certain that through the whole of the test, it was not the target, itwas his face that Ferris had watched, as if to see whether he, RobertStadler, could withstand the ray.

"That's all there is to it," the fattish Dr. Blodgett announced throughthe microphone, in the ingratiating sales tone of a department-storefloorwalker. "There is no nail or rivet remaining in the frame of thestructures and there is no blood vessel left unbroken in the bodies of theanimals."

The crowd was rustling with jerky movements and high-pitched whispers.People were looking at one another, rising uncertainly and dropping downagain, restlessly demanding anything but this pause. There was a sound ofsubmerged hysteria in the whispers. They seemed to be waiting to be told whatto think.

Dr. Stadler saw a woman being escorted down the steps from the back row,her head bent, a handkerchief pressed to her mouth: she was sick at herstomach.

He turned away and saw that Dr. Ferris was still watching him. Dr.

Stadler leaned back a little, his face austere and scornful, the face ofthe nation's greatest scientist, and asked, "Who invented that ghastlything?"

"You did."

Dr. Stadler looked at him, not moving.

"It is merely a practical appliance," said Dr. Ferris pleasantly, "basedupon your theoretical discoveries. It was derived from your invaluableresearch into the nature of cosmic rays and of the spatial transmission ofenergy."

"Who worked on the Project?"

"A few third-raters, as you would call them. Really, there was very littledifficulty. None of them could have begun to conceive of the first steptoward the concept of your energy-transmission formula, but given that—therest was easy."

"What is the practical purpose of this invention? What are the 'epoch-making possibilities'?"

"Oh, but don't you see? It is an invaluable instrument of public security.No enemy would attack the possessor of such a weapon. It will set the countryfree from the fear of aggression and permit it to plan its future inundisturbed safety." His voice had an odd carelessness, a tone of offhandimprovisation, as if he were neither expecting nor attempting to be believed.

"It will relieve social frictions. It will promote peace, stability and—as wehave indicated—harmony. It will eliminate all danger of war."

"What war? What aggression? With the whole world starving and all thosePeople's States barely subsisting on handouts from this country—where do yousee any danger of war? Do you expect those ragged savages to attack you?"

Dr. Ferris looked straight into his eyes. "Internal enemies can be asgreat a danger to the people as external ones," he answered. "Perhapsgreater." This time his voice sounded as if he expected and was certain to beunderstood. "Social systems are so precarious. But think of what stabilitycould be achieved by a few scientific installations at strategic key points.It would guarantee a state of permanent peace—don't you think so?"

Dr. Stadler did not move or answer; as the seconds clicked past and hisface still held an unchanged expression, it began to look paralyzed.

His eyes had the stare of a man who suddenly sees that which he had known,had known from the first, had spent years trying not to see, and who is nowengaged in a contest between the sight and his power to deny its existence."I don't know what you're talking about!" he snapped at last.

Dr. Ferris smiled. "No private businessman or greedy industrialist wouldhave financed Project X," he said softly, in the tone of an idle, informaldiscussion. "He couldn't have afforded it. It's an enormous investment, withno prospect of material gain. What profit could he expect from it? There areno profits henceforth to be derived from that farm." He pointed at the darkstrip in the distance. "But, as you have so well observed, Project X had tobe a non-profit venture. Contrary to a business firm, the State ScienceInstitute had no trouble in obtaining funds for the Project. You have notheard of the Institute having any financial difficulties in the past twoyears, have you? And it used to be such a problem—getting them to vote thefunds necessary for the advancement of science. They always demanded gadgetsfor their cash, as you used to say. Well, here was a gadget which some peoplein power could fully appreciate. They got the others to vote for it. Itwasn't difficult. In fact, a great many of those others felt safe in votingmoney for a project that was secret—they felt certain it was important, sincethey were not considered important enough to be let in on it.

There were, of course, a few skeptics and doubters. But they gave in whenthey were reminded that the head of the State Science Institute was Dr.Robert Stadler—whose judgment and integrity they could not doubt."

Dr. Stadler was looking down at his fingernails.

The sudden screech of the microphone jerked the crowd into aninstantaneous attentiveness; people seemed to be a second's worth of self-control away from panic. An announcer, with a voice like a machine gunspitting smiles, barked cheerily that they were now to witness the radiobroadcast that would break the news of the great discovery to the wholenation. Then, with a glance at his watch, his script and the signaling arm ofWesley Mouch, he yelled into the sparkling snake-head of the microphone—intothe living rooms, the offices, the studies, the nurseries of the country:"Ladies and gentlemen! Project X!"

Dr. Ferris leaned toward Dr. Stadler—through the staccato hoof beats ofthe announcer's voice galloping across the continent with a description ofthe new invention—and said in the tone of a casual remark, "It is vitallyimportant that there be no criticism of the Project in the country at thisprecarious time," then added semi-accidentally, as a semi-joke, "that therebe no criticism of anything at any time."

"—and the nation's political, cultural, intellectual and moral leaders,"the announcer was yelling into the microphone, "who have witnessed this greatevent, as your representatives and in your name, will now tell you theirviews of it in person!"

Mr. Thompson was the first to mount the wooden steps to the platform ofthe microphone. He snapped his way through a brief speech, hailing a new eraand declaring—in the belligerent tone of a challenge to unidentified enemies—that science belonged to the people and that every man on the face of theglobe had a right to a share of the advantages created by technologicalprogress.

Wesley Mouch came next. He spoke about social planning and the necessityof unanimous rallying in support of the planners. He spoke about discipline,unity, austerity and the patriotic duty of bearing temporary hardships. "Wehave mobilized the best brains of the country to work for your welfare. Thisgreat invention was the product of the genius of a man whose devotion to thecause of humanity is not to be questioned, a man acknowledged by all as thegreatest mind of the century—Dr. Robert Stadler!"

"What?" gasped Dr. Stadler, whirling toward Ferris.

Dr. Ferris looked at him with a glance of patient mildness.

"He didn't ask my permission to say that!" Dr. Stadler half-snapped, half-whispered .

Dr. Ferris spread out his hands in a gesture of reproachful helplessness."Now you see, Dr. Stadler, how unfortunate it is if you allow yourself to bedisturbed by political matters, which you have always considered unworthy ofyour attention and knowledge. You see, it is not Mr. Mouch's function to askpermissions."

The figure now slouching against the sky on the speakers platform, coilingitself about the microphone, talking in the bored, contemptuous tone of anoff-color story, was Dr. Simon Pritchett. He was declaring that the newinvention was an instrument of social welfare, which guaranteed generalprosperity, and that anyone who doubted this self evident fact was an enemyof society, to be treated accordingly.

"This invention, the product of Dr. Robert Stadler, the pre-eminent loverof freedom—"

Dr. Ferris opened a briefcase, produced some pages of neatly typed copyand turned to Dr. Stadler. "You are to be the climax of the broadcast," hesaid. "You will speak last, at the end of the hour." He extended the pages."Here's the speech you'll make," His eyes said the rest: they said that hischoice of words had not been accidental.

Dr. Stadler took the pages, but held them between the tips of two straightfingers, as one might hold a scrap of waste paper about to be tossed aside."I haven't asked you to appoint yourself as my ghost writer," he said. Thesarcasm of the voice gave Ferris his clue: this was not a moment for sarcasm.

"I couldn't have allowed your invaluable time to be taken up by thewriting of radio speeches," said Dr. Ferris. "I felt certain that you wouldappreciate it." He said it in a tone of spurious politeness intended to berecognized as spurious, the tone of tossing to a beggar the alms of face-saving .

Dr. Stadler's answer disturbed him: Dr. Stadler did not choose to answeror to glance down at the manuscript.

"Lack of faith," a beefy speaker was snarling on the platform, in the toneof a street brawl, "lack of faith is the only thing we got to fear! If we4iave faith in the plans of our leaders, why, the plans will work and we'llall have prosperity and ease and plenty. It's the fellows who go arounddoubting and destroying our morale, it's they who're keeping us in shortagesand misery. But we're not going to let them do it much longer, we're here toprotect the people—and if any of those doubting smarties come around, believeyou me, we'll take care of them!"

"It would be unfortunate," said Dr. Ferris in a soft voice, "to arousepopular resentment against the State Science Institute at an explosive timelike the present. There's a great deal of dissatisfaction and unrest in the

country—and if people should misunderstand the nature of the new invention,they're liable to vent their rage on all scientists. Scientists have neverbeen popular with the masses."

"Peace," a tall, willowy woman was signing into the microphone, "thisinvention is a great, new instrument of peace. It will protect us from theaggressive designs of selfish enemies, it will allow us to breathe freely andto learn to love our fellow men." She had a bony face with a mouth embitteredat cocktail parties, and wore a flowing pale blue gown, suggesting theconcert garment of a harpist. "It may well be considered as that miraclewhich was thought impossible in history—the dream of the ages—the finalsynthesis of science and love!"

Dr. Stadler looked at the faces in the grandstands. They were sittingquietly now, they were listening, but their eyes had an ebbing look oftwilight, a look of fear in the process of being accepted as permanent, thelook of raw wounds being dimmed by the veil of infection. They knew, as heknew it, that they were the targets of the shapeless funnels protruding fromthe mushroom building's dome—and he wondered in what manner they were nowextinguishing their minds and escaping that knowledge; he knew that the wordsthey were eager to absorb and believe were the chains slipping in to holdthem, like the goats, securely within the range of those funnels. They wereeager to believe; he saw the tightening lines of their lips, he saw theoccasional glances of suspicion they threw at their neighbors—as if thehorror that threatened them was not the sound ray, but the men who would makethem acknowledge it as horror. Their eyes were veiling over, but the remnantlook of a wound was a cry for help.

"Why do you think they think?" said Dr. Ferris softly. "Reason is thescientist's only weapon—and reason has no power over men, has it? At a timelike ours, with the country falling apart, with the mob driven by blinddesperation to the edge of open riots and violence-order must be maintained by any means available. What can we do when wehave to deal with people?"

Dr. Stadler did not answer.

A fat, jellied woman, with an inadequate brassiere under a dark,perspiration-stained dress, was saying into the microphone—Dr. Stadler couldnot believe it at first—that the new invention was to be greeted withparticular gratitude by the mothers of the country.

Dr. Stadler turned away; watching him, Ferris could see nothing but thenoble line of the high forehead and the deep cut of bitterness at the cornerof the mouth.

Suddenly, without context or warning, Robert Stadler whirled to face him.It was like a spurt of blood from a sudden crack in a wound that had almostclosed: Stadler's face was open, open in pain, in horror, in sincerity, asif, for that moment, both he and Ferris were human beings, while he moanedwith incredulous despair: "In a civilized century, Ferris, in a civilizedcentury!"

Dr. Ferris took his time to produce and prolong a soft chuckle. "I don'tknow what you're talking about," he answered in the tone of a quotation.Dr. Stadler lowered his eyes.

When Ferris spoke again, his voice had the faintest edge of a tone whichStadler could not define, except that it did not belong in any civilizeddiscussion: "It would be unfortunate if anything were to happen to jeopardizethe State Science Institute. It would be most unfortunate if the Institutewere to be closed—or if any one of us were to be forced to leave it. Wherewould we go? Scientists are an inordinate luxury these days—and there aren'tmany people or establishments left who're able to afford necessities, letalone luxuries. There are no doors left open to us. We wouldn't be welcome inthe research department of an industrial concern, such as—let us say—Rearden

Steel. Besides, if we should happen to make enemies, the same enemies wouldbe feared by any person tempted to employ our talents. A man like Reardenwould have fought for us. Would a man like Orren Boyle? But this is purelytheoretical speculation, because, as a matter of practical fact, all privateestablishments of scientific research have been closed by law—by Directive10-289, issued, as you might not realize, by Mr. Wesley Mouch. Are youthinking, perhaps, of universities? They are in the same position. They can'tafford to make enemies. Who would speak up for us? I believe that some suchman as Hugh Akston would have come to our defense—but to think of that is tobe guilty of an anachronism. He belonged to a different age. The conditionsset up in our social and economic reality have long since made his continuedexistence impossible. And I don't think that Dr. Simon Pritchett, or thegeneration reared under his guidance, would be able or willing to defend us.I have never believed in the efficacy of idealists—have you?—

and this is no age for impractical idealism. If anyone wished to oppose agovernment policy, how would he make himself heard? Through these gentlemenof the press, Dr. Stadler? Through this microphone? Is there an independentnewspaper left in the country? An uncontrolled radio station? A private pieceof property, for that matter—or a personal opinion?" The tone of the voicewas obvious now: it was the tone of a thug. "A personal opinion is the oneluxury that nobody can afford today."

Dr. Stadler's lips moved stiffly, as stiffly as the muscles of the goats,"You are speaking to Robert Stadler."

"I have not forgotten that. It is precisely because I have not forgottenit that I am speaking, 'Robert Stadler' is an illustrious name, which I wouldhate to see destroyed. But what is an illustrious name nowadays? In whoseeyes?" His arm swept over the grandstands. "In the eyes of people such as yousee around you? If they will believe, when so told, that an instrument ofdeath is a tool of prosperity—would they not believe it if they were toldthat Robert Stadler is a traitor and an enemy of the State? Would you thenrely on the fact that this is not true? Are you thinking of truth, Dr.Stadler? Questions of truth do not enter into social issues. Principles haveno influence on public affairs.

Reason has no power over human beings. Logic is impotent. Morality issuperfluous. Do not answer me now, Dr. Stadler. You will answer me over themicrophone. You're the next speaker."

Looking off at the dark strip of the farm in the distance, Dr. Stadlerknew that what he felt was terror, but he would not permit himself to knowits nature. He, who had been able to study the particles and sub particles ofcosmic space, would not permit himself to examine his feeling and to knowthat it was made of three parts: one part was terror of a vision that seemedto stand before his eyes, the vision of the inscription cut, in his honor,over the door of the Institute: "To the fearless mind, to the inviolatetruth"—another part was a plain, brute, animal fear of physical destruction,a humiliating fear which, in the civilized world of his youth, he had notexpected ever to experience—

and the third was the terror of the knowledge that by betraying the first,one delivers oneself into the realm of the second.

He walked toward the speaker's scaffold, his steps firm and slow, his headlifted, the manuscript of the speech held crumpled in his fingers.

It looked like a walk to mount either a pedestal or a guillotine. As thewhole of a man's life flashes before him in his dying moment, so he walked tothe sound of the announcer's voice reading to the country the list of RobertStadler's achievements and career. A faint convulsion ran over RobertStadler's face at the words: "—former head of the Department of Physics ofthe Patrick Henry University." He knew, distantly, not as if the knowledgewere within him, but as if it were within some person he was leaving behind,

that the crowd was about to witness an act of destruction more terrible thanthe destruction of. the farm.

He had mounted the first three steps of the scaffold, when a young newsmantore forward, ran to him and, from below, seized the railing to stop him."Dr. Stadler!" he cried in a desperate whisper. "Tell them the truth! Tellthem that you had nothing to do with it! Tell them what sort of infernalmachine it is and for what purpose it's intended to be used! Tell the countrywhat sort of people are trying to rule it! Nobody can doubt your word! Tellthem the truth! Save us! You're the only one who can!"

Dr. Stadler looked down at him. He was young; his movements and voice hadthat swift, sharp clarity which belongs to competence; among his aged,corrupt, favor-ridden and pull-created colleagues, he had managed to achievethe rank of elite of the political press, by means and in the role of a last,irresistible spark of ability. His eyes had the look of an eager,unfrightened intelligence; they were the kind of eyes Dr.

Stadler had seen looking up at him from the benches of classrooms.

He noticed that this boy's eyes were hazel; they had a tinge of green.

Dr. Stadler turned his head and saw that Ferris had come rushing to hisside, like a servant or a jailer. "I do not expect to be insulted by disloyalyoung punks with treasonable motives," said Dr. Stadler loudly.

Dr. Ferris whirled upon the young man and snapped, his face out ofcontrol, distorted by rage at the unexpected and unplanned, "Give me yourpress card and your work permit!"

"I am proud," Dr. Robert Stadler read-into the microphone and into theattentive silence of a nation, "that my years of work in the service ofscience have brought me the honor of placing into the hands of our greatleader, Mr. Thompson, a new instrument with an incalculable potential for acivilizing and liberating influence upon the mind of man. ..."

The sky had the stagnant breath of a furnace and the streets of New Yorkwere like pipes running, not with air and light, but with melted dust. Dagnystood on a street corner, where the airport bus had left her, looking at thecity in passive astonishment. The buildings seemed worn by weeks of summerheat, but the people seemed worn by centuries of anguish. She stood watchingthem, disarmed by an enormous sense of unreality.

That sense of unreality had been her only feeling since the early hours ofthe morning—since the moment when, at the end of an empty highway, she hadwalked into an unknown town and stopped the first passer-by to ask where shewas.

"Watsonville," he answered. "What state, please?" she asked. The manglanced at her, said, "Nebraska," and walked hastily away. She smiledmirthlessly, knowing that he wondered where she had come from and that noexplanation he could imagine would be as fantastic as the truth. Yet it wasWatsonville that seemed fantastic to her, as she walked through its streetsto the railroad station. She had lost the habit of observing despair as thenormal and dominant aspect of human existence, so normal as to becomeunnoticed—and the sight of it struck her in all of its senseless futility.She was seeing the brand of pain and fear on the faces of people, and thelook of evasion that refuses to know it—they seemed to be going through themotions of some enormous pretense, acting out a ritual to ward off reality,letting the earth remain unseen and their lives unlived, in dread ofsomething namelessly forbidden—

yet the forbidden was the simple act of looking at the nature of theirpain and questioning their duty to bear it. She was seeing it so clearly thatshe kept wanting to approach strangers, to shake them, to laugh in theirfaces and to cry, "Snap out of it!"

There was no reason for people to be as unhappy as that, she thought, noreason whatever . . . and then she remembered that reason was the one powerthey had banished from their existence.

She boarded a Taggart train for the nearest airfield; she did not identifyherself to anyone: it seemed irrelevant. She sat at the window of a coach,like a stranger who has to learn the incomprehensible language of thosearound her. She picked up a discarded newspaper; she managed, with effort, tounderstand what was written, but not why it should ever have been written: itall seemed so childishly senseless.

She stared in astonishment at a paragraph in a syndicated column from NewYork, which stated over emphatically that Mr. James Taggart wished it to beknown that his sister had died in an airplane crash, any unpatriotic rumorsto the contrary notwithstanding. Slowly, she remembered Directive 10-289 andrealized that Jim was embarrassed by the public suspicion that she hadvanished as a deserter.

The wording of the paragraph suggested that her disappearance had been aprominent public issue, not yet dropped. There were other suggestions of it:a mention of Miss Taggart's tragic death, in a story about the growing numberof plane crashes—and, on the back page, an ad, offering a $100,000 reward tothe person who would find the wreckage of her plane, signed by Henry Rearden.

The last gave her a stab of urgency; the rest seemed meaningless.

Then, slowly, she realized that her return was a public event which wouldbe taken as big news. She felt a lethargic weariness at the prospect of adramatic homecoming, of facing Jim and the press, of witnessing theexcitement. She wished they would get it over with in her absence.

At the airfield, she saw a small-town reporter interviewing some departingofficials. She waited till he had finished, then she approached him, extendedher credentials and said quietly, to the gaping stare of his eyes, "I'm DagnyTaggart. Would you make it known, please, that I'm alive and that I'll be inNew York this afternoon?" The plane was about to take off and she escaped thenecessity of answering questions.

She watched the prairies, the rivers, the towns slipping past at anuntouchable distance below—and she noted that the sense of detachment onefeels when looking at the earth from a plane was the same sense she felt whenlooking at people: only her distance from people seemed longer, Thepassengers were listening to some radio broadcast, which appeared to beimportant, judging by their earnest attentiveness. She caught brief snatchesof fraudulent voices talking about some sort of new invention that was tobring some undefined benefits to some undefined public's welfare. The wordswere obviously chosen to convey no specific meaning whatever; she wonderedhow one could pretend that one was hearing a speech; yet that was what thepassengers were doing.

They were going through the performance of a child who, not yet able toread, holds a book open and spells out anything he wishes to spell,pretending that it is contained in the incomprehensible black lines. But thechild, she thought, knows that he is playing a game; these people pretend tothemselves that they are not pretending; they know no other state ofexistence.

The sense of unreality remained as her only feeling, when she landed, whenshe escaped a crowd of reporters without being seen—

by avoiding the taxi stands and leaping into the airport bus—when she rodeon the bus, then stood on a street corner, looking et New York, She felt asif she were seeing an abandoned city.

She felt no sense of homecoming, when she entered her apartment; the placeseemed to be a convenient machine that she could use for some purpose of nosignificance whatever.

But she felt a quickened touch of energy, like the first break in a fog —atouch of meaning—when she picked up the telephone receiver and calledRearden's office in Pennsylvania. "Oh, Miss Taggart . . . Miss Taggart!"said, in a joyous moan, the voice of the severe, unemotional Miss Ives.

"Hello, Miss Ives. I haven't startled you, have I? You knew that I wasalive?"

"Oh yes! I heard it on the radio this morning.""Is Mr. Rearden in his office?"

"No, Miss Taggart. He . . . he's in the Rocky Mountains, searching for . .. that is . . ."

"Yes, I know. Do you know where we can reach him?"

"I expect to hear from him at any moment. He's stopping in Los Gatos,Colorado, right now. I phoned him, the moment I heard the news, but he wasout and I left a message for him to call me. You see, he's out flying, mostof the day . . . but he'll call me when he comes back to the hotel."

"What hotel is it?"

"The Eldorado Hotel, in Los Gatos."

"Thank you, Miss Ives." She was about to hang up.

"Oh, Miss Taggart!"

"Yes?"

"What was it that happened to you? Where were you?"

"I . . . I'll tell you when I see you. I'm in New York now. When Mr.Rearden calls, tell him please that I'll be in my office.""Yes, Miss Taggart."

She hung up, but her hand remained on the receiver, clinging to her firstcontact with a matter that had importance. She looked at her apartment and atthe city in the window, feeling reluctant to sink again into the dead fog ofthe meaningless.

She raised the receiver and called Los Gatos.

"Eldorado Hotel," said a woman's drowsily resentful voice.

"Would you take a message for Mr. Henry Rearden? Ash him, when he comesin, to-"

"Just a minute, please," drawled the voice, in the impatient tone thatresents any effort as an imposition.

She heard the clicking of switches, some buzzing, some breaks of silenceand then a man's clear, firm voice answering: "Hello?" It was Hank Rearden.

She stared at the receiver as at the muzzle of a gun, feeling trapped,unable to breathe.

"Hello?" he repeated.

"Hank, is that you?"

She heard a low sound, more a sigh than a gasp, and then the long, emptycrackling of the wire.

"Hank'" There was no answer. "Hank!" she screamed in terror.

She thought she heard the effort of a breath—then she heard a whisper,which was not a question, but a statement saying everything: "Dagny."

"Hank, I'm sorry—oh, darling, I'm sorry!—didn't you know?"

"Where are you, Dagny?"

"Are you all right?"

"Of course."

"Didn't you know that I was back and . . . and alive?""No ... I didn't know it.""Oh God, I'm sorry I called, I-"

"What are you talking about? Dagny, where are you?""In New York. Didn't you hear about it on the radio?""No. I've just come in."

"Didn't they give you a message to call Miss Ives?""No. "

"Are you all right?"

"Now?" She heard his soft, low chuckle. She was hearing the sound ofunreleased laughter, the sound of youth, growing in his voice with everyword. "When did you come back?"

"This morning."

"Dagny, where were you?"

She did not answer at once. "My plane crashed," she said. "In the Rockies.I was picked up by some people who helped me, but I could not send word toanyone."

The laughter went out of his voice. "As bad as that?"

"Oh . . . oh, the crash? No, it wasn't bad. I wasn't hurt. Not seriously."

"Then why couldn't you send word?"

"There were no ... no means of communication."

"Why did it take you so long to get back?"

"I . . . can't answer that now,"

"Dagny, were you in danger?"

The half-smiling, half-bitter tone of her voice was almost regret, as sheanswered, "No."

"Were you held prisoner?""No—not really."

"Then you could have returned sooner, but didn't?""That's true-but that's all I can tell you,""Where were you, Dagny?"

"Do you mind if we don't talk about it now? Let's wait until I see you.""Of course. I won't ask any questions. Just tell me: are you safe now?""Safe? Yes."

"I mean, have you suffered any permanent injuries or consequences?"She answered, with the same sound of a cheerless smile, "Injuries-no, Hank. I don't know, as to the permanent consequences.""Will you still be in New York tonight?""Why, yes. I'm . . . I'm back for good.""Are you?"

"Why do you ask that?"

"I don't know. I guess I'm too used to what it's like when . . . when Ican't find you.""I'm back."

"Yes. I'll see you in a few hours." His voice broke off, as if thesentence were too enormous to believe. "In a few hours," he repeated firmly."I'll be here.""Dagny-""Yes?"

He chuckled softly. "No, nothing. Just wanted to hear your voice awhilelonger. Forgive me. I mean, not now. I mean, I don't want to say anythingnow. "

"Hank, I-"

"When I see you, my darling. So long."

She stood looking at the silent receiver. For the first time since herreturn, she felt pain, a violent pain, but it made her alive, because it wasworth feeling.

She telephoned her secretary at Taggart Transcontinental, to say brieflythat she would be in the office in half an hour.

The statue of Nathaniel Taggart was real—when she stood facing it in theconcourse of the Terminal. It seemed to her that they were alone in a vast,echoing temple, with fog coils of formless ghosts weaving and vanishingaround them. She stood still, looking up at the statue, as for a brief momentof dedication. I'm back—were the only words she had to offer.

"Dagny Taggart" was still the inscription on the frosted glass panel ofthe door to her office. The look on the faces of her staff, as she enteredthe anteroom, was the look of drowning persons at the sight of a lifeline.She saw Eddie Willers standing at his desk in his glass enclosure, with someman before him. Eddie made a move in her direction, but stopped; he lookedimprisoned. She let her glance greet every face in turn, smiling at themgently as at doomed children, then walked toward Eddie's desk.

Eddie was watching her approach as if he were seeing nothing else in theworld, but his rigid posture seemed designed to pretend that he was listeningto the man before him.

"Motive power?" the man was saying in a voice that had a brusque, staccatosnap and a slurred, nasal drawl, together. "There's no problem about motivepower. You just take—"

"Hello," said Eddie softly, with a muted smile, as to a distant vision.

The man turned to glance at her. He had a yellow complexion, curly hair, ahard face made of soft muscles, and the revolting handsomeness belonging tothe esthetic standards of barroom corners; his blurred brown eyes had theempty flatness of glass.

"Miss Taggart," said Eddie, in a resonant tone of severity, the tone ofslapping the man into the manners of a drawing room he had never entered,"may I present Mr. Meigs?"

"How d' do," said the man without interest, then turned to Eddie andproceeded, as if she were not present: "You just take the Comet off theschedule for tomorrow and Tuesday, and shoot the engines to Arizona for thegrapefruit special, with the rolling stock from the Scranton coal run Imentioned. Send the orders out at once."

"You'll do nothing of the kind!" she gasped, too incredulous to be angry.

Eddie did not answer.

Meigs glanced at her with what would have been astonishment if his eyeswere capable of registering a reaction. "Send the orders," he said to Eddie,with no emphasis, and walked out.

Eddie was jotting notations on a piece of paper.

"Are you crazy?" she asked.

He raised his eyes to her, as though exhausted by hours of beating."We'll have to, Dagny" he said, his voice dead.

"What is that?" she asked, pointing at the outer door that had closed onMr. Meigs.

"The Director of Unification.""What?"

"The Washington representative, in charge of the Railroad UnificationPlan."

"What's that?"

"It's . . . Oh, wait, Dagny, are you all right? Were you hurt? Was it aplane crash?"

She had never imagined what the face of Eddie Willers would look like inthe process of aging, but she was seeing it now—aging at thirty-five andwithin the span of one month. It was not a matter of texture or wrinkles, itwas the same face with the same muscles, but saturated by the withering lookof resignation to a pain accepted as hopeless.

She smiled, gently and confidently, in understanding, in dismissal of allproblems, and said, extending her hand, "All right, Eddie. Hello."

He took her hand and pressed it to his lips, a thing he had never donebefore, his manner neither daring nor apologetic, but simply and openlypersonal.

"It was a plane crash," she said, "and, Eddie, so that you won't worry,111 tell you the truth: I wasn't hurt, not seriously. But that's not the

story I'm going to give to the press and to all the others. So you're neverto mention it.""Of course."

"I had no way to communicate with anyone, but not because I was hurt. It'sall I can tell you, Eddie. Don't ask me where I was or why it took me so longto return."

"I won't."

"Now tell me, what is the Railroad Unification Plan?"

"It's . . . Oh, do you mind?—let Jim tell you. He will, soon enough. Ijust don't have the stomach—unless you want me to," he added, with aconscientious effort at discipline, "No, you don't have to. Just tell mewhether I understood that Unificator correctly: he wants you to cancel theComet for two days in order to give her engines to a grapefruit special inArizona?"

"That's right."

"And he's cancelled a coal train in order to get cars to lug grapefruit?""Yes."

"Grapefruit?""That's right.""Why?"

"Dagny, 'why' is a word nobody uses any longer."

After a moment, she asked, "Have you any guess about the reason?""Guess? I don't have to guess. I know.""All right, what is it?"

"The grapefruit special is for the Smather brothers. The Smather brothersbought a fruit ranch in Arizona a year ago, from a man who went bankruptunder the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. He had owned the ranch for thirtyyears. The Smather brothers were in the punchboard business the year before.They bought the ranch by means of a loan from Washington under a project forthe reclamation of distressed areas, such as Arizona. The Smather brothershave friends in.

Washington."

"Well?"

"Dagny, everybody knows it. Everybody knows how train schedules have beenrun in the past three weeks, and why some districts and some shippers gettransportation, while others don't. What we're not supposed to do is say thatwe know it. We're supposed to pretend to believe that 'public welfare is theonly reason for any decision—and that the public welfare of the city of NewYork requires the immediate delivery of a large quantity of grapefruit." Hepaused, then added, "The Director of Unification is sole judge of the publicwelfare and has sole authority over the allocation of any motive power androlling stock on any railroad anywhere in the United States."

There was a moment of silence. "I see," she said. In another moment, sheasked, "What has been done about the Winston tunnel?"

"Oh, that was abandoned three weeks ago. They never unearthed the trains.The equipment gave out."

"What has been done about rebuilding the old line around the tunnel?"

"That was shelved."

"Then are we running any transcontinental traffic?"He gave her an odd glance. "Oh yes," he said bitterly."Through the detour of the Kansas Western?""No. "

"Eddie, what has been happening here in the past month?"

He smiled as if his words were an ugly confession. "We've been makingmoney in the past month," he answered.

She saw the outer door open and James Taggart come in, accompanied by Mr.Meigs. "Eddie, do you want to be present at the conference?"

she asked. "Or would you rather miss this one?""No. I want to be present."

Jim's face looked like a crumpled piece of paper, though its soft, puffedflesh had acquired no additional lines.

"Dagny, there's a lot of things to discuss, a lot of important changeswhich—" he said shrilly, his voice rushing in ahead of his person. "Oh, I'mglad to see you back, I'm happy that you're alive," he added impatiently,remembering. "Now there are some urgent—"

"Let's go to my office," she said.

Her office was like a historical reconstruction, restored and maintainedby Eddie Willers. Her map, her calendar, the picture of Nat Taggart were onthe walls, and no trace was left of the Clifton Locey era, "I understand thatI am still the Operating Vice-President of this railroad?" she asked, sittingdown at her desk.

"You are," said Taggart hastily, accusingly, almost defiantly. "Youcertainly are—and don't you forget it—you haven't quit, you're still —haveyou?"

"No, I haven't quit."

"Now the most urgent thing to do is to tell that to the press, tell themthat you're back on the job and where you were and—and, by the way, wherewere you?"

"Eddie," she said, "will you make a note on this and send it to the press?My plane developed engine trouble while I was flying over the Rocky Mountainsto the Taggart Tunnel. I lost my way, looking for an emergency landing, andcrashed in an uninhabited mountain section—

of Wyoming. I was found by an old sheepherder and his wife, who took me totheir cabin, deep in the wilderness, fifty miles away from the nearestsettlement. I was badly injured and remained unconscious for most of twoweeks. The old couple had no telephone, no radio, no means of communicationor transportation, except an old truck that broke down when they attempted touse it. I had to remain with them until I recovered sufficient strength towalk. I walked the fifty miles to the foothills, then hitchhiked my way to aTaggart station in Nebraska."

"I see," said Taggart. "Well, that's fine. Now when you give the pressinterview—"

"I'm not going to give any press interviews."

"What? But they've been calling me all day! They're waiting! It'sessential!" He had an air of panic. "It's most crucially essential!""Who's been calling you all day?"

"People in Washington and . . . and others . . . They're waiting for yourstatement."

She pointed at Eddie's notes. "There's my statement."

"But that's not enough! You must say that you haven't quit."

"That's obvious, isn't it? I'm back."

"You must say something about it."

"Such as what?"

"Something personal."

"To whom?"

"To the country. People were worried about you. You must reassure them.""The story will reassure them, if anyone was worried about me.""That's not what I mean!""Well, what do you mean?"

"I mean—" He stopped, his eyes avoiding hers. "I mean—" He sat, searchingfor words, cracking his knuckles.

Jim was going to pieces, she thought; the jerky impatience, theshrillness, the aura of panic were new; crude outbreaks of a tone ofineffectual menace had replaced his pose of cautious smoothness.

"I mean—" He was searching for words to name his meaning without namingit, she thought, to make her understand that which he did not want to beunderstood, "I mean, the public—"

"I know what you mean," she said. "No, Jim, I'm not going to reassure thepublic about the state of our industry."

"Now you're—"

"The public had better be as unreassured as it has the wits to be.

Now proceed to business."11 j _ 11

"Proceed to business, Jim."

He glanced at Mr. Meigs. Mr. Meigs sat silently, his legs crossed, smokinga cigarette. He wore a jacket which was not, but looked like, a militaryuniform. The flesh of his neck bulged over the collar, and the flesh of hisbody strained against the narrow waistline intended to disguise it. He wore aring with a large yellow diamond that flashed when he moved his stubbyfingers.

"You've met Mr. Meigs," said Taggart. "I'm. so glad that the two of youwill get along well together." He made an expectant half-pause, but receivedno answer from either. "Mr. Meigs is the representative of the RailroadUnification Plan. You'll have many opportunities to cooperate with him."

"What is the Railroad Unification Plan?"

"It is a . . .a new national setup that went into effect three weeks ago,which you will appreciate and approve of and find extremely practical." Shemarveled at the futility of his method: he was acting as if, by naming heropinion in advance, he would make her unable to alter it. "It is an emergencysetup which has saved the country's transportation system."

"What is the plan?"

"You realize, of course, the insurmountable difficulties of any sort ofconstruction job during this period of emergency. It is—temporarily-impossible to lay new track. Therefore, the country's top problem is topreserve the transportation industry as a whole, to preserve its existingplant and all of its existing facilities. The national survival requires—""What is the plan?"

"As a policy of national survival, the railroads of the country have beenunified into a single team, pooling their resources. All of their grossrevenue is turned over to the Railroad Pool Board in Washington, which actsas trustee for the industry as a whole, and divides the total income amongthe various railroads, according to a . . .a more modern principle ofdistribution."

"What principle?"

"Now don't worry, property rights have been fully preserved and protected,they've merely been given a new form. Every railroad retains independentresponsibility for its own operations, its train schedules and themaintenance of its track and equipment. As its contribution to the nationalpool, every railroad permits any other, when conditions so require, to useits track and facilities without charge. At the end of the year, the PoolBoard distributes the total gross income, and every individual railroad ispaid, not on the haphazard, old-fashioned basis of the number of trains runor the tonnage of freight carried, but on the basis of its need—that is, thepreservation of its track being its main need, every individual railroad ispaid according to the mileage of the track which it owns and maintains."

She heard the words; she understood the meaning; she was unable to make itreal—to grant the respect of anger, concern, opposition to a nightmare pieceof insanity that rested on nothing but people's willingness to pretend tobelieve that it was sane. She felt a numbed emptiness —and the sense of beingthrown far below the realm where moral indignation is pertinent.

"Whose track are we using for our transcontinental traffic?" she asked,her voice flat and dry.

"Why, our own, of course," said Taggart hastily, "that is, from New Yorkto Bedford, Illinois. We run our trains out of Bedford on the track of theAtlantic Southern."

"To San Francisco?"

"Well, it's much faster than that long detour you tried to establish."

"We run our trains without charge for the use of the track?"

"Besides, your detour couldn't have lasted, the Kansas Western rail wasshot, and besides—"

"Without charge for the use of the Atlantic Southern track?"

"Well, we're not charging them for the use of our Mississippi bridge,either."

After a moment, she asked, "Have you looked at a map?"

"Sure," said Meigs unexpectedly. "You own the largest track mileage of anyrailroad in the country. So you've got nothing to worry about."Eddie Willers burst out laughing.

Meigs glanced at him blankly, "What's the matter with you?" he asked."Nothing," said Eddie wearily, "nothing."

"Mr. Meigs," she said, "if you look at a map, you will see that two thirdsof the cost of maintaining a track for our transcontinental traffic is givento us free and is paid by our competitor."

"Why, sure, " he said, but his eyes narrowed, watching her suspiciously, asif he were wondering what motive prompted her to so explicit a statement.

"While we're paid for owning miles of useless track which carries notraffic," she said.

Meigs understood—and leaned back as if he had lost all further interest inthe discussion.

"That's not true!" snapped Taggart. "We're running a great number of local

trains to serve the region of our former transcontinental line-through Iowa, Nebraska and Colorado—and, on the other side of the tunnel,

through California, Nevada and Utah."

"We're running two locals a day," said Eddie Willers, in the dry, blankly

innocent tone of a business report. "Fewer, some places."

"What determines the number of trains which any given railroad is

obligated to run?" she asked.

"The public welfare," said Taggart "The Pool Board," said Eddie.

"How many trains have been discontinued in the country in the past three

weeks ?"

"As a matter of fact," said Taggart eagerly, "the plan has helped toharmonize the industry and to eliminate cutthroat competition."

"It has eliminated thirty per cent of the trains run in-the country,"

said Eddie. "The only competition left is in the applications to the Boardfor permission to cancel trains. The railroad to survive will be the one thatmanages to run no trains at all."

"Has anybody calculated how long the Atlantic Southern is expected to beable to remain in business?"

"That's no skin off your—" started Meigs.

"Please, Cuffy!" cried Taggart.

"The president of the Atlantic Southern, " said Eddie impassively, "hascommitted suicide."

"That had nothing to do with this!" yelled Taggart. "It was over apersonal matter!"

She remained silent. She sat, looking at their faces. There was still anelement of wonder in the numbed indifference of her mind: Jim had alwaysmanaged to switch the weight of his failures upon the strongest plants aroundhim and to survive by destroying them to pay for his errors, as he had done

with Dan Conway, as he had done with the industries of Colorado; but this didnot have even the rationality of a looter—this pouncing upon the drainedcarcass of a weaker, a half bankrupt competitor for a moment's delay, withnothing but a cracking bone between the pouncer and the abyss.

The impulse of the habit of reason almost pushed her to speak, to argue,to demonstrate the self-evident—but she looked at their faces and she sawthat they knew it. In some terms different from hers, in some inconceivablemanner of consciousness, they knew all that she could tell them, it wasuseless to prove to them the irrational horror of their course and of itsconsequences, both Meigs and Taggart knew it—

and the secret of their consciousness was the means by which they escapedthe finality of their knowledge, "I see," she said quietly.

"Well, what would you rather have had me do?" screamed Taggart.

"Give up our transcontinental traffic? Go bankrupt? Turn the railroad intoa miserable East Coast local?" Her two words seemed to have hit him worsethan any indignant objection; he seemed to be shaking with terror at thatwhich the quiet "I see" had acknowledged seeing. "I couldn't help it! We hadto have a transcontinental track! There was no way to get around the tunnel!We had no money to pay for any extra costs! Something had to be done! We hadto have a track!"

Meigs was looking at him with a glance of part-astonishment, part disgust,"I am not arguing, Jim," she said dryly.

"We couldn't permit a railroad like Taggart Transcontinental to crash! Itwould have been a national catastrophe! We had to think of all the cities andindustries and shippers and passengers and employees and stockholders whoselives depend on us! It wasn't just for ourselves, it was for the publicwelfare! Everybody agrees that the Railroad Unification Plan is practical!The best-informed—"

"Jim," she said, "if you have any further business to discuss with me —discuss it."

"You've never considered the social angle of anything," he said, in asullen, retreating voice.

She noticed that this form of pretense was as unreal to Mr. Meigs as itwas to her, though for an antipodal reason. He was looking at Jim with boredcontempt. Jim appeared to her suddenly as a man who had tried to find amiddle course between two poles—Meigs and herself —and who was now seeingthat his course was narrowing and that he was to be ground between twostraight walls.

"Mr. Meigs," she asked, prompted by a touch of bitterly amused curiosity,"what is your economic plan for day after tomorrow?"

She saw his bleary brown eyes focus upon her without expression."You're impractical," he said.

"It's perfectly useless to theorize about the future," snapped Taggart,"when we have to take care of the emergency of the moment. In the long run—""In the long run, we'll all be dead," said Meigs.

Then, abruptly, he shot to his feet. "I'll run along, Jim," he said. "I'vegot no time to waste on conversations." He added, "You talk to her about thatmatter of doing something to stop all those train wrecks—if she's the littlegirl who's such a wizard at railroading." It was said inoffensively; he was aman who would not know when he was giving offense or taking it.

"I'll see you later, Cuffy," said Taggart, as Meigs walked out with noparting glance at any of them.

Taggart looked at her, expectantly and fearfully, as if dreading hercomment, yet desperately hoping to hear some word, any word.

"Well?" she asked.

"What do you mean?"

"Have you anything else to discuss?"

"Well, I . . . " He sounded disappointed. "Yes!" he cried, in the tone ofa desperate plunge. "I have another matter to discuss, the most important oneof all, the-"

"Your growing number of train wrecks?"

"No! Not that."

"What, then?"

"It's . . . that you're going to appear on Bertram Scudder's radio programtonight."

She leaned back. "Am I?"

"Dagny, it's imperative, it's crucial, there's nothing to be done aboutit, to refuse is out of the question, in times like these one has no choice,and-"

She glanced at her watch. "I'll give you three minutes to explain—if you want to be heard at all. And you'd better speak straight.""All right!" he said desperately. "It's considered most important—on the highest levels, I mean Chick Morrison and Wesley Mouch and Mr.Thompson, as high as that—that you should make a speech to the nation, amorale-building speech, you know, saying that you haven't quit.""Why?"

"Because everybody thought you had! . . . You don't know what's been goingon lately, but . . . but it's sort of uncanny. The country is full of rumors,all sorts of rumors, about everything, all of them dangerous. Disruptive, Imean. People seem to do nothing but whisper. They don't believe thenewspapers, they don't believe the best speakers, they believe every vicious,scare-mongering piece of gossip that comes floating around. There's noconfidence left, no faith, no order, no ... no respect for authority.People . . . people seem to be on the verge of panic."

"Well?"

"Well, for one thing, it's that damnable business of all those bigindustrialists who've vanished into thin air! Nobody's been able to explainit and it's giving them the jitters. There's all sorts of hysterical stuffbeing whispered about it, but what they whisper mostly is that 'no decent manwill work for those people.' They mean the people in Washington. Now do yousee? You wouldn't suspect that you were so famous, but you are, or you'vebecome, ever since your plane crash. Nobody believed the plane crash. Theyall thought you had broken the law, that is, Directive 10-289, and deserted.There's a lot of popular . . . misunderstanding of Directive 10-289, a lot of. . . well, unrest.

Now you see how important it is that you go on the air and tell peoplethat it isn't true that Directive 10-289 is destroying industry, that it's asound piece of legislation devised for everybody's good, and that if they'lljust be patient a little longer, things will improve and prosperity willreturn. They don't believe any public official any more. You . . .

you're an industrialist, one of the few left of the old school, and theonly one who's ever come back after they thought you'd gone. You're known as. . . as a reactionary who's opposed to Washington policies. So the peoplewill believe you. It would have a great influence on them, it would buttresstheir confidence, it would help their morale. Now do you see?"

He had rushed on, encouraged by the odd look of her face, a look ofcontemplation that was almost a faint half-smile.

She had listened, hearing, through his words, the sound of Rearden's voicesaying to her on a spring evening over a year ago: "They need some sort ofsanction from us. I don't know the nature of that sanction —but, Dagny, Iknow that if we value our lives, we must not give it to them. If they put youon a torture rack, don't give it to them. Let them destroy your railroad andmy mills, but don't give it to them."

"Now do you see?"

"Oh yes, Jim, I see!"

He could not interpret the sound of her voice, it was low, it was part-moan, part-chuckle, part-triumph—but it was the first sound of emotion tocome from her, and he plunged on, with no choice but to hope. "I promisedthem in Washington that you'd speak! We can't fail them—not in an issue ofthis kind! We can't afford to be suspected of disloyalty. It's alt arranged.You'll be the guest speaker on Bertram Scudder's program, tonight, at ten-thirty. He's got a radio program where he interviews prominent publicfigures, it's a national hookup, he has a large following, he reaches overtwenty million people. The office of the Morale Conditioner has—"

"The what?"

"The Morale Conditioner—that's Chick Morrison—has called me three times,to make sure that nothing would go wrong. They've issued orders to all thenews broadcasters, who've been announcing it all day, all over the country,telling people to listen to you tonight on Bertram Scudder's hour."

He looked at her as if he were demanding both an answer and therecognition that her answer was the element of least importance in thesecircumstances. She said, "You know what I think of the Washington policiesand of Directive 10-289."

"At a time like this, we can't afford the luxury of thinking!"

She laughed aloud.

"But don't you see that you can't refuse them now?" he yelled. "If youdon't appear after all those announcements, it will support the rumors, itwill amount to an open declaration of disloyalty!"

"The trap won't work, Jim."

"What trap?"

"The one you're always setting up.""I don't know what you mean!"

"Yes, you do. You knew—all of you knew it—that I would refuse.

So you pushed me into a public trap, where my refusal would become anembarrassing scandal for you, more embarrassing than you thought I'd dare tocause. You were counting on me to save your faces and the necks you stuckout. I won't save them."

"But I promised it!"

"I didn't."

"But we can't refuse them! Don't you see that they've got us hogtied?

That they're holding us by the throat? Don't you know what they can do tous through this Railroad Pool, or through the Unification Board, or throughthe moratorium on our bonds?"

"I knew that two years ago."

He was shaking; there was some formless, desperate, almost superstitiousquality in his terror, out of proportion to the dangers he named.

She felt suddenly certain that it came from something deeper than his feaof bureaucratic reprisal, that the reprisal was the only identification of iwhich he would permit himself to know, a reassuring identification which hada semblance of rationality and hid his true motive. She felt certain that itwas not the country's panic he wanted to stave off, but his own—that he, andChick Morrison and Wesley Mouch and all the rest of the looting crew neededher sanction, not to reassure their victims, but to reassure themselves,though the allegedly crafty, the allegedly practical idea of deluding theirvictims was the only identification they gave to their own motive and theirhysterical insistence. With an awed contempt—awed by the enormity of thesight—she wondered what inner degradation those men had to reach in order toarrive at a level of self-deception where they would seek the extortedapproval of an unwilling victim as the moral sanction they needed, they whothought that they were merely deceiving the world.

"We have no choice!" he cried. "Nobody has any choice!"

"Get out of here," she said, her voice very quiet and low.

Some tonal quality in the sound of her voice struck the note of theunconfessed within him, as ft, never allowing it into words, he knew fromwhat knowledge that sound had come. He got out.

She glanced at Eddie; he looked like a man worn by fighting one more ofthe attacks of disgust which he was learning to endure as a chroniccondition.

After a moment, he asked, "Dagny, what became of Quentin Daniels?You were flying after him, weren't you?""Yes," she said. "He's gone."'To the destroyer?"

The word hit her like a physical blow. It was the first touch of the outerworld upon that radiant presence which she had kept within her all day, as asilent, changeless vision, a private vision, not to be affected by any of thethings around her, not to be thought about, only to be felt as the source ofher strength. The destroyer, she realized, was the name of that vision, here,in their world.

"Yes," she said dully, with effort, "to the destroyer."

Then she closed her hands over the edge of the desk, to steady her purposeand her posture, and said, with the bitter hint of a smile, "Well, Eddie,let's see what two impractical persons, like you and me, can do aboutpreventing the tram wrecks."

It was two hours later—when she was alone at her desk, bent over sheets ofpaper that bore nothing but figures, yet were like a motion picture filmunrolling to tell her the whole story of the railroad in the past four weeks—that the buzzer rang and her secretary's

voice said, "Mrs. Rearden to see you, Miss Taggart."

"Mr. Rearden?" she asked incredulously, unable to believe either.

"No. Mrs. Rearden."

She let a moment pass, then said, "Please ask her to come in."

There was some peculiar touch of emphasis in Lillian Rearden's bearingwhen she entered and walked toward the desk. She wore a tailored suit, with aloose, bright bow hanging casually sidewise for a note of elegantincongruity, and a small hat tilted at an angle considered smart by virtue ofbeing considered amusing; her face was a shade too smooth, her steps a shadetoo slow, and she walked almost as if she were swinging her hips.

"How do you do, Miss Taggart, " she said in a lazily gracious voice, adrawing-room voice which seemed to strike, in that office, the same style ofincongruity as her suit and her bow.

Dagny inclined her head gravely.

Lillian glanced about the office; her glance had the same style ofamusement as her hat: an amusement purporting to express maturity by theconviction that life could be nothing but ridiculous.

"Please sit down," said Dagny.

Lillian sat down, relaxing Into a confident, gracefully casual posture.

When she turned her face to Dagny, the amusement was still there, but itsshading was now different: it seemed to suggest that they shared a secret,which would make her presence here seem preposterous to the world, but self-evidently logical to the two of them. She stressed it by remaining silent.

"What can I do for you?"

"I came to tell you, " said Lillian pleasantly, "that you will appear onBertram Scudder's broadcast tonight."

She detected no astonishment in Dagny's face, no shock, only the glance ofan engineer studying a motor that makes an irregular sound.

"I assume," said Dagny, "that you are fully aware of the form of yoursentence."

"Oh yes!" said Lillian.

"Then proceed to support it.""I beg your pardon?""Proceed to tell me."

Lillian gave a brief little laugh, its forced brevity betraying that thiswas not quite the attitude she had expected. "I am sure that no lengthyexplanations will be necessary," she said. "You know why your appearance onthat broadcast is important to those in power. I know why you have refused toappear. I know your convictions on the subject.

You may have attached no importance to it, but you do know that mysympathy has always been on the side of the system now in power.

Therefore, you will understand my interest in the issue and my place init. When your brother told me that you had refused, I decided to take a handin the matter—because, you see, I am one of the very few who know that youare not in a position to refuse."

"I am not one of those few, as yet," said Dagny.

Lillian smiled. "Well, yes, I must explain a little further. You realizethat your radio appearance will have the same value for those in power as—asthe action of my husband when he signed the Gift Certificate that turnedRearden Metal over to them. You know how frequently and how usefully theyhave been mentioning it in all of their propaganda."

"I didn't know that," said Dagny sharply.

"Oh, of course, you have been away for most of the last two months, so youmight have missed the constant reminders—in the press, on the radio, inpublic speeches—that even Hank Rearden approves of and supports Directive 10-289, since he has voluntarily signed his Metal over to the nation. Even HankRearden. That discourages a great many recalcitrants and helps to keep themin line." She leaned back and asked in the tone of a casual aside, "Have youever asked him why he signed?"

Dagny did not answer; she did not seem to hear that it was a question; shesat still and her face was expressionless, but her eyes seemed too large andthey were fixed on Lillian's, as if she were now intent upon nothing buthearing Lillian to the end.

"No, I didn't think you knew it. I didn't think that he would ever tellyou," said Lillian, her voice smoother, as if recognizing the signposts andsliding comfortably down the anticipated course. "Yet you must learn thereason that made him sign—because it is the same reason that will make youappear on Bertram Scudder's broadcast tonight."

She paused, wishing to be urged; Dagny waited.

"It is a reason," said Lillian, "which should please you—as far as myhusband's action is concerned. Consider what that signature meant to him.Rearden Metal was his greatest achievement, the summation of the best in hislife, the final symbol of his pride—and my husband, as you have reason toknow, is an extremely passionate man, his pride in himself being, perhaps,his greatest passion. Rearden Metal was more than an achievement to him, itwas the symbol of his ability to achieve, of his independence, of hisstruggle, of his rise. It was his property, his by right—and you know whatrights mean to a man as strict as he, and what property means to a man aspossessive. He would have gladly died to defend it, rather than surrender itto the men he despised. This is what it meant to him—and this is what he gaveup. You will be glad to know that he gave it up for your sake, Miss Taggart.For the sake of your reputation and your honor. He signed the GiftCertificate surrendering Rearden Metal—under the threat that the adultery hewas carrying on with you would be exposed to the eyes of the world. Oh yes,we had full proof of it, in every intimate detail. I believe that you hold aphilosophy which disapproves of sacrifice—but in this case, you are mostcertainly a woman, so I'm sure that you will feel gratification at themagnitude of the sacrifice a man has made for the privilege of using your

body. You have undoubtedly taken great pleasure in the nights which he spentin your bed. You may now take pleasure in the knowledge of what those nightshave cost him. And since—you like bluntness, don't you, Miss Taggart?—sinceyour chosen status is that of a whore, I take my hat off to you in regard tothe price you exacted, which none of your sisters could ever have hoped tomatch."

Lillian's voice had kept growing reluctantly sharper, like a drill headthat kept breaking by being unable to find the line of the fault in thestone. Dagny was still looking at her, but the intensity had vanished fromDagny's eyes and posture. Lillian wondered why she felt as if Dagny's facewere hit by a spotlight. She could detect no particular expression, it wassimply a face in natural repose—and the clarity seemed to come from itsstructure, from the precision of its sharp planes, the firmness of the mouth,the steadiness of the eyes. She could not decipher the expression of theeyes, it seemed incongruous, it resembled the calm, not of a woman, but of ascholar, it had that peculiar, luminous quality which is the fearlessness ofsatisfied knowledge.

"It was I," said Lillian softly, "who informed the bureaucrats about myhusband's adultery."

Dagny noticed the first flicker of feeling in Lillian's lifeless eyes: itresembled pleasure, but so distantly that it looked like sunlight reflectedfrom the dead surface of the moon to the stagnant water of a swamp; itflickered for an instant and went.

"It was I," said Lillian, "who took Rearden Metal away from him."

It sounded almost like a plea.

It was not within the power of Dagny's consciousness ever to understandthat plea or to know what response Lillian had hoped to find; she knew onlythat she had not found it, when she heard the sudden shrillness of Lillian'svoice: "Have you understood me?"

"Yes."

"Then you know what I demand and why you'll obey me. You thought you wereinvincible, you and he, didn't you?" The voice was attempting smoothness, butit was jerking unevenly. "You have always acted on no will but your own—aluxury I have not been able to afford. For once and in compensation, I willsee you acting on mine.

You can't fight me. You can't buy your way out of it, with those dollarswhich you're able to make and I'm not. There's no profit you can offer me—I'mdevoid of greed. I'm not paid by the bureaucrats for doing this—I am doing itwithout gain. Without gain. Do you understand me?"

"Yes."

"Then no further explanations are necessary, only the reminder that allthe factual evidence—hotel registers, jewelry bills and stuff like that—isstill in the possession of the right persons and will be broadcast on everyradio program tomorrow, unless you appear on one radio program tonight. Isthis clear?"

"Yes."

"Now what is your answer?" She saw the luminous scholar-eyes looking ather, and suddenly she felt as if too much of her were seen and as if she werenot seen at all.

"I am glad that you have told me," said Dagny. "I will appear on BertramScudder's broadcast tonight."

There was a beam of white light beating down upon the glittering metal ofa microphone—in the center of a glass cage imprisoning her with BertramScudder. The spark of glitter were greenish-blue; the microphone was made ofRearden Metal.

Above them, beyond a sheet of glass, she could distinguish a booth withtwo rows of faces looking down at her: the lax, anxious face of James

Taggart, with Lillian Rearden beside him, her hand resting reassuringly onhis arm—a man who had arrived by plane from Washington and had beenintroduced to her as Chick Morrison—and a group of young men from his staff,who talked about percentage curves of intellectual influence and acted likemotorcycle cops.

Bertram Scudder seemed to be afraid of her. He clung to the microphone,spitting words into its delicate mesh, into the ears of the country,introducing the subject of his program. He was laboring to sound cynical,skeptical, superior and hysterical together, to sound like a man who sneersat the vanity of all human beliefs and thereby demands an instantaneousbelief from his listeners. A small patch of moisture glistened on the back ofhis neck. He was describing in over colored detail her month of convalescencein the lonely cabin of a sheepherder, then her heroic trudging down fiftymiles of mountain trails for the sake of resuming her duties to the people inthis grave hour of national emergency.

". . . And if any of you have been deceived by vicious rumors aimed toundermine your faith in the great social program of our leaders—

you may trust the word of Miss Taggart, who—"

She stood, looking up at the white beam. Specks of dust were whirling inthe beam and she noticed that one of them was alive: it was a gnat with atiny sparkle in place of its beating wings, it was struggling for somefrantic purpose of its own, and she watched it, feeling as distant from itspurpose as from that of the world.

". . . Miss Taggart is an impartial observer, a brilliant businesswomanwho has often been critical of the government in the past and who may be saidto represent the extreme, conservative viewpoint held by such giants ofindustry as Hank Rearden. Yet even she—"

She wondered at how easy it felt, when one did not have to feel; sheseemed to be standing naked on public display, and a beam of light was enoughto support her, because there was no weight of pain in her, no hope, noregret, no concern, no future.

". . . And now, ladies and gentlemen, I will present to you the heroine ofthis night, our most uncommon guest, the—"

Pain came back to her in a sudden, piercing stab, like a long splinterfrom the glass of a protective wall shattered by the knowledge that the nextwords would be hers; it came back for the brief length of a name in her mind,the name of the man she had called the destroyer: she did not want him tohear what she would now have to say. If you hear it—the pain was like a voicecrying it to him—you won't believe the things I have said to you—no, worse,the things which I have not said, but which you knew and believed andaccepted —you will think that I was not free to offer them and that my dayswith you were a lie—this will destroy my one month and ten of your years—

this was not the way I wanted you to learn it, not like this, not tonight—but you will, you who've watched and known my every movement, you who'rewatching me now, wherever you are—you will hear it—but it has to be said.

"—the last descendant of an illustrious name in our industrial history,the woman executive possible only in America, the Operating Vice-President ofa great railroad—Miss Dagny Taggart!"

Then she felt the touch of Rearden Metal, as her hand closed over the stemof the microphone, and it was suddenly easy, not with the drugged ease ofindifference, but with the bright, clear, living ease of action.

"I came here to tell you about the social program, the political systemand the moral philosophy under which you are now living."

There was so calm, so natural, so total a certainty in the sound of hervoice that the mere sound seemed to carry an immense persuasiveness.

"You have heard it said that I believe that this system has depravity asits motive, plunder as its goal, lies, fraud and force as its method, and

destruction as its only result. You have also heard it said that, like HankRearden, I am a loyal supporter of this system and that I give my voluntaryco-operation to present policies, such as Directive 10-289.1 have come hereto tell you the truth about it.

"It is true that I share the stand of Hank Rearden. His politicalconvictions are mine. You have heard him denounced in the past as areactionary who opposed every step, measure, slogan and premise of thepresent system. Now you hear him praised as our greatest industrialist, whosejudgment on the value of economic policies may safely be trusted. It is true.You may trust his judgment. If you are now beginning to fear that you are inthe power of an irresponsible evil, that the country is collapsing and thatyou will soon be left to starve—consider the views of our ablestindustrialist, who knows what conditions are necessary to make productionpossible and to permit a country to survive.

Consider all that you know about his views. At such times as he was ableto speak, you have heard him tell you that this government's policies wereleading you to enslavement and destruction. Yet he did not denounce the finalclimax of these policies—Directive 10-289. You have heard him fighting forhis rights—his and yours—for his independence, for his property. Yet he didnot fight Directive 10-289. He signed voluntarily, so you have been told, theGift Certificate that surrendered Rearden Metal to his enemies. He signed theone paper which, by all of his previous record, you had expected him to fightto the death. What could this mean—you have constantly been told—

unless it meant that even he recognized the necessity of Directive 10289and sacrificed his personal interests for the sake of the country?

Judge his views by the motive of that action, you have constantly beentold. And with this I agree unreservedly: judge his views by the motive ofthat action. And—for whatever value you attach to my opinion and to anywarning I may give you—judge my views also by the motive of that action,because his convictions are mine.

"For two years, I had been Hank Rearden's mistress. Let there be nomisunderstanding about it: I am saying this, not as a shameful confession,but with the highest sense of pride. I had been his mistress. I had sleptwith him, in his bed, in his arms. There is nothing anyone might now say toyou about me, which I will not tell you first. It will be useless to defameme—I know the nature of the accusations and I will state them to you myself.Did I feel a physical desire for him? I did. Was I moved by a passion of mybody? I was. Have I experienced the most violent form of sensual pleasure? Ihave. If this now makes me a disgraced woman in your eyes—let your estimatebe your own concern. I will stand on mine."

Bertram Scudder was staring at her; this was not the speech he hadexpected and he felt, in dim panic, that it was not proper to let itcontinue, but she was the special guest whom the Washington rulers hadordered him to treat cautiously; he could not be certain whether he was nowsupposed to interrupt her or not; besides, he enjoyed hearing this sort ofstory. In the audience booth, James Taggart and Lillian Rearden sat frozen,like animals paralyzed by the headlight of a train rushing down upon them;they were the only ones present who knew the connection between the wordsthey were hearing and the theme of the broadcast; it was too late for them tomove; they dared not assume the responsibility of a movement or of whateverwas to follow.

In the control room, a young intellectual of Chick Morrison's staff stoodready to cut the broadcast off the air in case of trouble, but he saw nopolitical significance in the speech he was hearing, no element he couldconstrue as dangerous to his masters. He was accustomed to hearing speechesextorted by unknown pressure from unwilling victims, and he concluded thatthis was the case of a reactionary forced to confess a scandal and that,

therefore, the speech had, perhaps, some political value; besides, he wascurious to hear it "I am proud that he had chosen me to give him pleasure andthat it was he who had been my choice. It was not—as it is for most of you—

an act of casual indulgence and mutual contempt. It was the ultimate formof our admiration for each other, with full knowledge of the values by whichwe made our choice. We are those who do not disconnect the values of theirminds from the actions of their bodies, those who do not leave their valuesto empty dreams, but bring them into existence, those who give material formto thoughts, and reality to values—those who make steel, railroads andhappiness. And to such among you who hate the thought of human joy, who wishto see men's life as chronic suffering and failure, who wish men to apologizefor happiness—or for success, or ability, or achievement, or wealth—

to such among you, I am now saying: I wanted him, I had him, I was happy,I had known joy, a pure, full, guiltless joy, the joy you dread to hearconfessed by any human being, the joy of which your only knowledge is in yourhatred for those who are worthy of reaching it. Well, hate me, then—because Ireached it!"

"Miss Taggart, " said Bertram Scudder nervously, "aren't we departing fromthe subject of . . . After all, your personal relationship with Mr.Rearden has no political significance which—"

"[ didn't think it had, either. And, of course, I came here to tell youabout the political and moral system under which you are now living. Well, Ithought that I knew everything about Hank Rearden, but there was one thingwhich I did not learn until today. It was the blackmail threat that ourrelationship would be made public that forced Hank Rearden to sign the GiftCertificate surrendering Rearden Metal. It was blackmail—blackmail by yourgovernment officials, by your rulers, by your—"

In the instant when Scudder's hand swept out to knock the microphone over,a faint click came from its throat as it crashed to the floor, signifyingthat the intellectual cop had cut the broadcast off the air.

She laughed—but there was no one to see her and to hear the nature of herlaughter. The figures rushing into the glass enclosure were screaming at oneanother. Chick Morrison was yelling unprintable curses at Bertram Scudder—Bertram Scudder was shouting that he had been opposed to the whole idea, buthad been ordered to do it—James Taggart looked like an animal baring itsteeth, while he snarled at two of Morrison's youngest assistants and avoidedthe snarls of an older third. The muscles of Lillian Rearden's face had anodd slackness, like the limbs of an animal lying in the road, intact butdead. The morale conditioners were shrieking what they guessed they thoughtMr.

Mouch would think. "What am I to say to them?" the program announcer wascrying, pointing at the microphone. "Mr. Morrison, there's an audiencewaiting, what am I to say?" Nobody answered him. They were not fighting overwhat to do, but over whom to blame.

Nobody said a word to Dagny or glanced in her direction. Nobody stoppedher, when she walked out.

She stepped into the first taxicab in sight, giving the address of herapartment. As the cab started, she noticed that the dial of the radio on thedriver's panel was lighted and silent, crackling with the brief, tense coughsof static: it was tuned to Bertram Scudder's program.

She lay back against the seat, feeling nothing but the desolation of theknowledge that the sweep of her action had, perhaps, swept away the man whomight never wish to see her again. She felt, for the first time, theimmensity of the hopelessness of finding him—if he did not choose to befound—in the streets of the city, in the towns of a continent, in the canyonsof the Rocky Mountains where the goal was closed by a screen of rays. But onething remained to her, like a log floating on a void, the log to which she

had clung through the broadcast—and she knew that this was the thing shecould not abandon, even were she to lose all the rest; it was the sound ofhis voice saying to her: "Nobody stays here by faking reality in any mannerwhatever."

"Ladies and gentlemen,'1 the voice of Bertram Scudder's announcer crackledsuddenly out of the static, "due to technical difficulties over which we haveno control, this station will remain off the air, pending the necessaryreadjustments." The taxi driver gave a brief, contemptuous chuckle—andsnapped the radio off.

When she stepped out and handed him a bill, he extended the change to herand, suddenly, leaned forward for a closer look at her face.

She felt certain that he recognized her and she held his glance austerelyfor an instant. His bitter face and his over patched shirt were worn out by ahopeless, losing struggle. As she handed him. a tip, he said quietly, withtoo earnest, too solemn an emphasis for a mere acknowledgment of the corns,"Thank you, ma'am,"

She turned swiftly and hurried into the building, not to let him see theemotion which was suddenly more than she could bear.

Her head was drooping, as she unlocked the door of her apartment, and thelight struck her from below, from the carpet, before she jerked her head upin astonishment at finding the apartment lighted. She took a step forward—andsaw Hank Rearden standing across the room.

She was held still by two shocks: one was the sight of his presence, shehad not expected him to be back so soon; the other was the sight of his face.His face had so firm, so confident, so mature a look of calm, in the fainthalf-smile, in the clarity of the eyes, that she felt as if he had ageddecades within one month, but aged in the proper sense of human growth, agedin vision, in stature, in power. She felt that he who had lived through amonth of agony, he whom she had hurt so deeply and was about to hurt moredeeply still, he would now be the one to give her support and consolation,his would be the strength to protect them both. She stood motionless for onlyan instant, but she saw his smile deepening as if he were reading herthoughts and telling her that she had nothing to fear. She heard a slight,crackling sound and saw, on a table beside him, the lighted dial of a silentradio. Her eyes moved to his as a question and he answered by the faintestnod, barely more than a lowering of his eyelids; he had heard her broadcast.

They moved toward each other in the same moment. He seized her shouldersto support her, her face was raised to his, but he did not touch her lips, hetook her hand and kissed her wrist, her fingers, her palm, as the sole formof the greeting which so much of his suffering had gone to await. Andsuddenly, broken by the whole of this day and of that month, she was sobbingin his arms, slumped against him, sobbing as she had never done in her life,as a woman, in surrender to pain and in a last, futile protest against it.

Holding her so that she stood and moved only by means of his body, nothers, he led her to the couch and tried to make her sit down beside him, butshe slipped to the floor, to sit at his feet and bury her face in his kneesand sob without defense or disguise.

He did not lift her, he let her cry, with his arm tight about her. Shefelt his hand on her head, on. her shoulder, she felt the protection of hisfirmness, a firmness which seemed to tell her that as her tears were for bothof them, so was his knowledge, that he knew her pain and felt it andunderstood, yet was able to witness it calmly—and his calm seemed to lift herburden, by granting her the right to break, here, at his feet, by telling herthat he was able to carry what she could not carry any longer. She knew dimlythat this was the real Hank Rearden, and no matter what form of insultingcruelty he had once given to their first nights together, no matter how oftenshe had seemed as the stronger of the two, this had always been within him

and at the root of their bond—this strength of his which would protect her ifever hers were gone.

When she raised her head, he was smiling down at her.

"Hank . . ." she whispered guiltily, in desperate astonishment at her ownbreak.

"Quiet, darling."

She let her face drop back on his knees; she lay still, fighting for rest,fighting against the pressure of a wordless thought: he had been able to bearand to accept her broadcast only as a confession of her love; it made thetruth she now had to tell him more inhuman a blow than anyone had the rightto deliver. She felt terror at the thought that she would not have thestrength to do it, and terror at the thought that she would.

When she looked up at him again, he ran his hand over her forehead,brushing the hair o2 her face.

"It's over, darling," he said. "The worst of it is over, for both of us."

"No, Hank, it isn't."

He smiled.

He drew her to sit beside him, with her head on his shoulder. "Don't sayanything now," he said. "You know that we both understand all that has to besaid, and we'll speak of it, but not until it has ceased to hurt you quite somuch."

His hand moved down the line of her sleeve, down a fold of her skirt, withso light a pressure that it seemed as if the hand did not feel the bodyinside the clothes, as if he were regaining possession, not of her body, butonly of its vision.

"You've taken too much," he said. "So have I. Let them batter us.

There's no reason why we should add to it. No matter what we have to face,there can be no suffering between the two of us. No added pain.

Let that come from their world. It won't come from us. Don't be afraid.

We won't hurt each other. Not now."

She raised her head, shaking it with a bitter smile—there was a desperateviolence in her movement, but the smile was a sign of recovery: of thedetermination to face the despair.

"Hank, the kind of hell I let you go through in the last month—"

Her voice was trembling.

"It's nothing, compared to the kind of hell I let you go through in thelast hour." His voice was steady.

She got up, to pace the room, to prove her strength—her steps like wordstelling him that she was not to be spared any longer. When she stopped andturned to face him, he rose, as if he understood her motive.

"I know that I've made it worse for you," she said, pointing at the radio.

He shook his head. "No."

"Hank, there's something I have to tell you."

"So have I. Will you let me speak first? You see, it's something I shouldhave said to you long ago. Will you let me speak and not answer me until Ifinish?"

She nodded.

He took a moment to look at her as she stood before him, as if to hold thefull sight of her figure, of this moment and of everything that had led themto it.

"I love you, Dagny, " he said quietly, with the simplicity of an unclouded,yet unsmiling happiness.

She was about to speak, but knew that she couldn't, even if he hadpermitted it, she caught her unuttered words, the movement of her lips washer only answer, then she inclined her head in acceptance.

"I love you. As the same value, as the same expression, with the samepride and the same meaning as I love my work, my mills, my Metal, my hours at

a desk, at a furnace, in a laboratory, in an ore mine, as I love my abilityto work, as I love the act of sight and knowledge, as I love the action of mymind when it solves a chemical equation or grasps a sunrise, as I love thethings I've made and the things I've felt, as my product, as my choice, as ashape of my world, as my best mirror, as the wife I've never had, as thatwhich makes all the rest of it possible: as my power to live."

She did not drop her face, but kept it level and open, to hear and accept,as he wanted her to and as he deserved.

"I loved you from the first day I saw you, on a flatcar on a siding ofMilford Station. I loved you when we rode in the cab of the first engine onthe John Gait Line. I loved you on the gallery of Ellis Wyatt's house. Iloved you on that next morning. You knew it. But it's I who must say it toyou, as I'm saying it now—if I am to redeem all those days and to let them befully what they were for both of us, I loved you. You knew it. I didn't. Andbecause I didn't, I had to learn it when I sat at my desk and looked at theGift Certificate for Rearden Metal."

She closed her eyes. But there was no suffering in his face, nothing butthe immense and quiet happiness of clarity.

" 'We are those who do not disconnect the values of their minds from theactions of their bodies.' You said it in your broadcast tonight.

But you knew it, then, on that morning in Ellis Wyatt's house. You knewthat all those insults I was throwing at you were the fullest confession oflove a man could make. You knew that the physical desire I was damning as ourmutual shame, is neither physical nor an expression of one's body, but theexpression of one's mind's deepest values, whether one has the courage toknow it or not. That was why you laughed at me as you did, wasn't it?"

"Yes," she whispered.

"You said, 'I do not want your mind, your will, your being or your soul—solong as it's to me that you will come for that lowest one of your desires. 'You knew, when you said it, that it was my mind, my will, my being and mysoul that I was giving you by means of that desire. And I want to say it now,to let that morning mean what it meant: my mind, my will, my being and mysoul, Dagny—yours, for as long as I shall live."

He was looking straight at her and she saw a brief sparkle in his eyes,which was not a smile, but almost as if he had heard the cry she had notuttered.

"Let me finish, dearest. I want you to know how fully I know what I amsaying. I, who thought that I was fighting them, I had accepted the worst ofour enemies' creed—and that is what I've paid for ever since, as I am payingnow and as I must. I had accepted the one tenet by which they destroy a manbefore he's started, the killer-tenet: the breach between his mind and body.I had accepted it, like most of their victims, not knowing it, not knowingeven that the issue existed. I rebelled against their creed of humanimpotence and I took pride in my ability to think, to act, to work for thesatisfaction of my desires.

But I did not know that this was virtue, I never identified it as a moralvalue, as the highest of moral values, to be defended above one's life,because it's that which makes life possible. And I accepted punishment forit, punishment for virtue at the hands of an arrogant evil, made arrogantsolely by my ignorance and my submission.

"1 accepted their insults, their frauds, their extortions. I thought Icould afford to ignore them—all those impotent mystics who prattle abouttheir souls and are unable to build a roof over their heads. I thought thatthe world was mine, and that those jabbering incompetents were no threat tomy strength. I could not understand why I kept losing every battle. I did notknow that the force unleashed against me was my own. While I was busyconquering matter, I had surrendered to them the realm of the mind, of

thought, of principle, of law, of values, of morality. I had accepted,unwittingly and by default, the tenet that ideas were of no consequence toone's existence, to one's work, to reality, to this earth—as if ideas werenot the province of reason, but of that mystic faith which I despised. Thiswas all they wanted me to concede. It was enough. I had surrendered thatwhich all of their claptrap is designed to subvert and to destroy: man'sreason.

No, they were not able to deal with matter, to produce abundance, tocontrol this earth. They did not have to. They controlled me.

"I, who knew that wealth is only a means to an end, created the means andlet them prescribe my ends. I, who took pride in my ability to achieve thesatisfaction of my desires, let them prescribe the code of values by which Ijudged my desires. I, who shaped matter to serve my purpose, was left with apile of steel and gold, but with my every purpose defeated, my every desirebetrayed, my every attempt at happiness frustrated.

"1 had cut myself in two, as the mystics preached, and I ran my businessby one code of rules, but my own life by another. I rebelled against thelooters' attempt to set the price and value of my steel—but I let them setthe moral values of my life. I rebelled against demands for an unearnedwealth—but I thought it was my duty to grant an unearned love to a wife Idespised, an unearned respect to a mother who hated me, an unearned supportto a brother who plotted for my destruction. I rebelled against undeservedfinancial injury—but I accepted a life of undeserved pain. I rebelled againstthe doctrine that my productive ability was guilt—but I accepted, as guilt,my capacity for happiness. I rebelled against the creed that virtue is somedisembodied unknowable of the spirit—but I damned you, you, my dearest one,for the desire of your body and mine. But if the body is evil; then so arethose who provide the means of its survival, so is material wealth and thosewho produce it—and if moral values are set in contradiction to our physicalexistence, then it's right that rewards should be unearned, that virtueshould consist of the undone, that there should be no tie between achievementand profit, that the inferior animals who're able to produce should servethose superior beings whose superiority in spirit consists of incompetence inthe flesh.

"If some man like Hugh Akston had told me, when I started, that byaccepting the mystics' theory of sex I was accepting the looters' theory ofeconomics, I would have laughed in his face. I would not laugh at him now.Now I see Rearden Steel being ruled by human scum—I see the achievement of mylife serving to enrich the worst of my enemies—and as to the only two personsI ever loved, I've brought a deadly insult to one and public disgrace to theother. I slapped the face of the man who was my friend, my defender, myteacher, the man who set me free by helping me to learn what I've learned, Iloved him, Dagny, he was the brother, the son, the comrade I never had—but Iknocked him out of my life, because he would not help me to produce for thelooters. I'd give anything now to have him back, but I own nothing to offerin such repayment, and I'll never see him again, because it's I who'll knowthat there is no way to deserve even the right to ask forgiveness.

"But what I've done to you, my dearest, is still worse. Your speech andthat you had to make it—that's what I've brought upon the only woman I loved,in payment for the only happiness I've known. Don't tell me that it was yourchoice from the first and that you accepted all consequences, includingtonight—it does not redeem the fact that it was I who had no better choice tooffer you. And that the looters forced you to speak, that you spoke to avengeme and set me free-does not redeem the fact that it was I who made their tactics possible.It was not then own convictions of sin and dishonor that they could use todisgrace you—it was mine. They merely carried out the things I believed and

said in Ellis Wyatt's house. It was I who kept our love bidden as a guiltysecret—they merely treated it for what it was by my own appraisal. It was Iwho was willing to counterfeit reality for the sake of appearance in theireyes—they merely cashed in on the right I had given them.

"People think that a liar gains a victory over his victim. What I'velearned is that a lie is an act of self-abdication, because one surrendersone's reality to the person to whom one lies, making that person one'smaster, condemning oneself from then on to faking the sort of reality thatperson's view requires to be faked. And if one gains the immediate purpose ofthe lie—the price one pays is the destruction of that which the gain wasintended to serve. The man who lies to the world, is the world's slave fromthen on- When I chose to hide my love for you, to disavow it in public andlive it as a lie, I made it public property—and the public has claimed it ina fitting sort of manner. I had no way to avert it and no power to save you.When I gave in to the looters, when I signed their Gift Certificate, toprotect you—I was still faking reality, there was nothing else left open tome—and, Dagny, I'd rather have seen us both dead than permit them to do whatthey threatened. But there are no white lies, there is only the blackness ofdestruction, and a white lie is the blackest of all. I was still fakingreality, and it had the inexorable result: instead of protection, it broughtyou a more terrible kind of ordeal, instead of saving your name, it forcedyou to offer yourself for a public stoning and to throw the stones by yourown hand. I know that you were proud of the things you said, and I was proudto hear you—but that was the pride we should have claimed two years ago.

"No, you did not make it worse for me, you set me free, you saved us both,you redeemed our past. I can't ask you to forgive me, we're far beyond suchterms—and the only atonement I can offer you is the fact that I am happy.That I am happy, my darling, not that I suffer. I am happy that I have seenthe truth—even if my power of sight is all that's left to me now. Were I tosurrender to pain and give up in futile regret that my own error has wreckedmy past—that would be the act of final treason, the ultimate failure towardthat truth I regret having failed. But if my love of truth is left as my onlypossession, then the greater the loss behind me, the greater the pride I maytake in the price I have paid for that love. Then the wreckage will notbecome a funereal mount above me, but will serve as a height I have climbedto attain a wider field of vision. My pride and my power of vision were allthat I owned when I started—and whatever I achieved, was achieved by means ofthem. Both are greater now, Now I have the knowledge of the superlative valueI had missed: of my right to be proud of my vision. The rest is mine toreach.

"And, Dagny, the one thing I wanted, as the first step of my future, wasto say that I love you—as I'm saying it now. I love you, my dearest, withthat blindest passion of my body which comes from the clearest perception ofmy mind—and my love for you is the only attainment of my past that will beleft to me, unchanged, through all the years ahead. I wanted to say it to youwhile I still had the right to say it. And because I had not said it at ourbeginning, this is the way I have to say it—at the end. Now I'll tell youwhat it was that you wanted to tell me—because, you see, I know it and Iaccept: somewhere within the past month, you have met the man you love, andif love means one's final, irreplaceable choice, then he is the only manyou've ever loved."

"Yes!" Her voice was half-gasp, half-scream, as under a physical blow,with shock as her only awareness. "Hank!—how did you know it?"

He smiled and pointed at the radio. "My darling, you used nothing but thepast tense."

"Oh . . . !" Her voice was now half-gasp, half-moan, and she closed hereyes.

"You never pronounced the one word you would have rightfully thrown atthem, were it otherwise. You said, 'I wanted him,' not, 'I love him.' Youtold me on the phone today that you could have returned sooner. No otherreason would have made you leave me as you did. Only that one reason wasvalid and right."

She was leaning back a little, as if fighting for balance to stand, yetshe was looking straight at him, with a smile that did not part her lips, butsoftened her eyes to a glance of admiration and her mouth to a shape of pain.

"It's true. I've met the man I love and will always love, I've seen him,I've spoken to him—but he's a man whom I can't have, whom I may never haveand, perhaps, may never see again."

"I think I've always known that you would find him. I knew what you feltfor me, I knew how much it was, but I knew that I was not your final choice.What you'll give him is not taken away from me, it's what I've never had. Ican't rebel against it. What I've had means too much to me—and that I've hadit, can never be changed."

"Do you want me to say it, Hank? Will you understand it, if I say thatI'll always love you?"

"I think I've understood it before you did."

"I've always seen you as you are now. That greatness of yours which youare just beginning to allow yourself to know—I've always known it and I'vewatched your struggle to discover it. Don't speak of atonement, you have nothurt me, your mistakes came from your magnificent integrity under the tortureof an impossible code—and your fight against it did not bring me suffering,it brought me the feeling I've found too seldom: admiration. If you willaccept it, it will always be yours. What you meant to me can never bechanged. But the man I met—he is the love I had wanted to reach long before Iknew that he existed, and I think he will remain beyond my reach, but that Ilove him will be enough to keep me living."

He took her hand and pressed it to his lips. "Then you know what I feel,"he said, "and why I am still happy."

Looking up at his face, she realized that for the first time he was whatshe had always thought him intended to be: a man with an immense capacity forthe enjoyment of existence. The taut look of endurance, of fiercelyunadmitted pain, was gone; now, in the midst of the wreckage and of hishardest hour, his face had the serenity of pure strength; it had the look shehad seen in the faces of the men in the valley.

"Hank," she whispered, "I don't think I can explain it, but I feel that Ihave committed no treason, either to you or to him."

"You haven't."

Her eyes seemed abnormally alive in a face drained of color, as if herconsciousness remained untouched in a body broken by exhaustion. He made hersit down and slipped his arm along the back of the couch, not touching her,yet holding her in a protective embrace.

"Now tell me," he asked, "where were you?"

"I can't tell you that. I've given my word never to reveal anything aboutit. I can say only that it's a place I found by accident, when I crashed, andI left it blindfolded—and I wouldn't be able to find it again."

"Couldn't you trace your way back to it?"

"I won't try."

"And the man?"

"I won't look for him."

"He remained there?"

"I don't know."

"Why did you leave him?"

"I can't tell you."

"Who is he?"

Her chuckle of desperate amusement was involuntary. "Who is John Gait?"He glanced at her, astonished—but realized that she was not joking."So there is a John Gait?" he asked slowly, "Yes.""That slang phrase refers to him?""Yes."

"And it has some special meaning?"

"Oh yes! . . . There's one thing I can tell you about him, because Idiscovered it earlier, without promise of secrecy: he is the man who inventedthe motor we found."

"Oh!" He smiled, as if he should have known it. Then he said softly, witha glance that was almost compassion, "He's the destroyer, isn't he?" He sawher look of shock, and added, "No, don't answer me, if you can't. I think Iknow where you were. It was Quentin Daniels that you wanted to save from thedestroyer, and you were following Daniels when you crashed, weren't you?"

"Yes."

"Good God, Dagny!—does such a place really exist? Are they all alive? Isthere . . . ? I'm sorry. Don't answer."She smiled. "It does exist."He remained silent for a long time."Hank, could you give up Rearden Steel?"

"No!" The answer was fiercely immediate, but he added, with the firstsound of hopelessness in his voice, "Not yet."

Then he looked at her, as if, in the transition of his three words, he hadlived the course of her agony of the past month. "I see," he said. He ran hishand over her forehead, with a gesture of understanding, of compassion, of analmost incredulous wonder. "What hell you've now undertaken to endure!" hesaid, his voice low.

She nodded.

She slipped down, to lie stretched, her face on his knees. He stroked herhair; he said, "We'll fight the looters as long as we can. I don't know whatfuture is possible to us, but we'll win or we'll learn that it's hopeless.Until we do, we'll fight for our world. We're all that's left of it."

She fell asleep, lying there, her hand clasping his. Her last awareness,before she surrendered the responsibility of consciousness, was the sense ofan enormous void, the void of a city and of a continent where she would neverbe able to find the man whom she had no right to seek.

CHAPTER IVANTI-LIFE

James Taggart reached into the pocket of his dinner jacket, pulled out thefirst wad of paper he found, which was a hundred-dollar bill, and dropped itinto the beggar's hand.

He noticed that the beggar pocketed the money in a manner as indifferentas his own. "Thanks, bud." said the beggar contemptuously, and walked away.

James Taggart remained still in the middle of the sidewalk, wondering whatgave him a sense of shock and dread. It was not the man's insolence—he hadnot sought any gratitude, he had not been moved by pity, his gesture had beenautomatic and meaningless. It was that the beggar acted as if he would havebeen indifferent had he received a hundred dollars or a dime or, failing tofind any help whatever, had seen himself dying of starvation within thisnight. Taggart shuddered and walked brusquely on, the shudder serving to cutoff the realization that the beggar's mood matched his own.

The walls of the street around him had the stressed, unnatural clarity ofa summer twilight, while an orange haze filled the channels of intersectionsand veiled the tiers of roofs, leaving him on a shrinking remnant of ground.The calendar in the sky seemed to stand insistently out of the haze, yellowlike a page of old parchment, saying: August 5, No—he thought, in answer tothings he had not named—it was not true, he felt fine, that's why he wantedto do something tonight. He could not admit to himself that his peculiarrestlessness came from a desire to experience pleasure; he could not admitthat the particular pleasure he wanted was that of celebration, because hecould not admit what it was that he wanted to celebrate.

This had been a day of intense activity, spent on words floating asvaguely as cotton, yet achieving a purpose as precisely as an adding machine,summing up to his full satisfaction. But his purpose and the nature of hissatisfaction had to be kept as carefully hidden from himself as they had beenfrom others; and his sudden craving for pleasure was a dangerous breach.

The day had started with a small luncheon in the hotel suite of a visitingArgentinian legislator, where a few people of various nationalities hadtalked at leisurely length about the climate of Argentina, its soil, itsresources, the needs of its people, the value of a dynamic, progressiveattitude toward the future—and had mentioned, as the briefest topic ofconversation, that Argentina would be declared a People's State within twoweeks.

It had been followed by a few cocktails at the home of Orren Boyle, withonly one unobtrusive gentleman from Argentina sitting silently in a corner,while two executives from Washington and a few friends of unspecifiedpositions had talked about national resources, metallurgy, mineralogy,neighborly duties and the welfare of the globe—and had mentioned that a loanof four billion dollars would be granted within three weeks to the People'sState of Argentina and the People's State of Chile.

It had been followed by a small cocktail party in a private room of thebar built like a cellar on the roof of a skyscraper, an informal party givenby him, James Taggart, for the directors of a recently formed company, TheInterneighborly Amity and Development Corporation, of which Orren Boyle waspresident and a slender, graceful, overactive man from Chile was treasurer, aman whose name was Senor Mario Martinez, but whom Taggart was tempted, bysome resemblance of spirit, to call Senor Cuffy Meigs. Here they had talkedabout golf, horse races, boat races, automobiles and women. It had not beennecessary to mention, since they all knew it, that the Interneighborly Amityand Development Corporation had an exclusive contract to operate, on a

twenty-year "managerial lease," all the industrial properties of the People'sStates of the Southern Hemisphere.

The last event of the day had been a large dinner reception at the home ofSenor Rodrigo Gonzales, a diplomatic representative of Chile.

No one had heard of Senor Gonzales a year ago, but he had become famousfor the parties he had given in the past six months, ever since his arrivalin New York. His guests described him as a progressive businessman. He hadlost his property—it was said—when Chile, becoming a People's State, hadnationalized all properties, except those belonging to citizens of backward,non-People's countries, such as Argentina; but he had adopted an enlightenedattitude and had joined the new regime, placing himself in the service of hiscountry. His home in New York occupied an entire floor of an exclusiveresidential hotel.

He had a fat, blank face and the eyes of a killer. Watching him attonight's reception, Taggart had concluded that the man was impervious to anysort of feeling, he looked as if a knife could slash, unnoticed, through hispendulous layers of flesh—except that there was a lewd, almost sexual relishin the way he rubbed his feet against the rich pile of his Persian rugs, orpatted the polished arm of his chair, or folded his lips about a cigar. Hiswife, the Senora Gonzales, was a small, attractive woman, not as beautiful asshe assumed, but enjoying the reputation of a beauty by means of a violentnervous energy and an odd manner of loose, warm, cynical self-assertivenessthat seemed to promise anything and to absolve anyone. It was known that herparticular brand of trading was her husband's chief asset, in an age when onetraded, not goods, but favors—and, watching her among the guests, Taggart hadfound amusement in wondering what deals had been made, what directivesissued, what industries destroyed in exchange for a few chance nights, whichmost of those men had had no reason to seek and, perhaps, could no longerremember. The party had bored him, there had been only half a dozen personsfor whose sake he had put in an appearance, and it had not been necessary tospeak to that half-dozen, merely to be seen and to exchange a few glances.Dinner had been about to be served, when he had heard what he had come tohear: Senor Gonzales had mentioned—the smoke of his cigar weaving over thehalf-dozen men who had drifted toward his armchair—that by agreement with thefuture People's State of Argentina, the properties of d'Anconia Copper wouldbe nationalized by the People's State of Chile, in less than a month, onSeptember 2.

It had all gone as Taggart had expected; the unexpected had come when, onhearing those words, he had felt an irresistible urge to escape.

He had felt incapable of enduring the boredom of the dinner, as if someother form of activity were needed to greet the achievement of this night. Hehad walked out into the summer twilight of the streets, feeling as if he wereboth pursuing and pursued: pursuing a pleasure which nothing could give him,in celebration of a feeling which he dared not name—pursued by the dread ofdiscovering what motive had moved him through the planning of tonight'sachievement and what aspect of it now gave him this feverish sense ofgratification.

He reminded himself that he would sell his d'Anconia Copper stock, whichhad never rallied fully after its crash of last year, and he would purchaseshares of the Inter-neighborly Amity and Development Corporation, as agreedwith his friends, which would bring him a fortune. But the thought broughthim nothing but boredom; this was not the thing he wanted to celebrate.

He tried to force himself to enjoy it: money, he thought, had been hismotive, money, nothing worse. Wasn't that a normal motive? A valid one?Wasn't that what they all were after, the Wyatts, the Reardens, thed'Anconias? ... He jerked his head to stop it: he felt as if his thoughts

were slipping down a dangerous blind alley, the end of which he must neverpermit himself to see.

No—he thought bleakly, in reluctant admission—money meant nothing to himany longer. He had thrown dollars about by the hundreds—

at that party he had given today—for unfinished drinks, for uneatendelicacies, for unprovoked tips and unexpected whims, for a long distancephone call to Argentina because one of the guests had wanted to check theexact version of a smutty story he had started telling, for the spur of anymoment, for the clammy stupor of knowing that it was easier to pay than tothink.

"You've got nothing to worry about, under that Railroad Unification Plan,"Orren Boyle had giggled to him drunkenly. Under the Railroad UnificationPlan, a local railroad had gone bankrupt in North Dakota, abandoning theregion to the fate of a blighted area, the local banker had committedsuicide, first killing his wife and children—a freight train had been takenoil the schedule in Tennessee, leaving a local factory without transportationat a day's notice, the factory owner's son had quit college and was now injail, awaiting execution for a murder committed with a gang of raiders—a waystation had been closed in Kansas, and the station agent, who had wanted tobe a scientist, had given up his studies and become a dishwasher—that he,James Taggart, might sit in a private barroom and pay for the alcohol pouringdown Orren Boyle's throat, for the waiter who sponged Boyle's garments whenhe spilled his drink over his chest, for the carpet burned by the cigarettesof an ex-pimp from Chile who did not want to take the trouble of reaching foran ashtray across a distance of three feet.

It was not the knowledge of his indifference to money that now gave him ashudder of dread. It was the knowledge that he would be equally indifferent,were he reduced to the state of the beggar. There had been a time when he hadfelt some measure of guilt—in no clearer a form than a touch of irritation—atthe thought that he shared the sin of greed, which he spent his timedenouncing. Now he was hit by the chill realization that, in fact, he hadnever been a hypocrite: in full truth, he had never cared for money. Thisleft another hole gaping open before him, leading into another blind alleywhich he could not risk seeing.

I just want to do something tonight!—he cried soundlessly to someone atlarge, in protest and in demanding anger—in protest against whatever it wasthat kept forcing these thoughts into his mind—in anger at a universe wheresome malevolent power would not permit him to find enjoyment without the needto know what he wanted or why.

What do you want?—some enemy voice kept asking, and he walked faster,trying to escape it. It seemed to him that his brain was a maze where a blindalley opened at every turn, leading into a fog that hid an abyss. It seemedto him that he was running, while the small island of safety was shrinkingand nothing but those alleys would soon be left. It was like the remnant ofclarity in the street around him, with the haze rolling in to fill all exits.Why did it have to shrink?—he thought in panic. This was the way he had livedall his life—keeping his eyes stubbornly, safely on the immediate pavementbefore him, craftily avoiding the sight of his road, of corners, ofdistances, of pinnacles. He had never intended going anywhere, he had wantedto be free of progression, free of the yoke of a straight line, he had neverwanted his years to add up to any sum—what had summed them up?—why had hereached some unchosen destination where one could no longer stand still orretreat? "Look where you're going, brother!" snarled some voice, while anelbow pushed him back—and he realized that he had collided with some large,ill-smelling figure and that he had been running.

He slowed his steps and admitted into his mind a recognition of thestreets he had chosen in his random escape. He had not wanted to know that he

was going home to his wife. That, too, was a fogbound alley, but there was noother left to him.

He knew—the moment he saw Cherryl's silent, poised figure as she rose athis entrance into her room—that this was more dangerous than he had allowedhimself to know and that he would not find what he wanted. But danger, tohim, was a signal to shut off his sight, suspend his judgment and pursue anunaltered course, on the unstated premise that the danger would remain unrealby the sovereign power of his wish not to see it—like a foghorn within him,blowing, not to sound a warning, but to summon the fog.

"Why, yes, I did have an important business banquet to attend, but Ichanged my mind, I felt like having dinner with you tonight, " he said in thetone of a compliment—but a quiet "I see" was the only answer he obtained.

He felt irritation at her unastonished manner and her pale, unrevealingface. He felt irritation at the smooth efficiency with which she gaveinstructions to the servants, then at finding himself in the candlelight ofthe dining room, facing her across a perfectly appointed table, with twocrystal cups of fruit in silver bowls of ice between them.

It was her poise that irritated him most; she was no longer an incongruouslittle freak, dwarfed by the luxury of the residence which a famous artisthad designed; she matched it. She sat at the table as if she were the kind ofhostess that room had the right to demand. She wore a tailored housecoat ofrusset-colored brocade that blended with the bronze of her hair, the severesimplicity of its lines serving as her only ornament. He would have preferredthe jingling bracelets and rhinestone buckles of her past. Her eyes disturbedhim, as they had for months: they were neither friendly nor hostile, butwatchful and questioning.

"I closed a big deal today," he said, his tone part boastful, partpleading. "A deal involving this whole continent and half a dozengovernments."

He realized that the awe, the admiration, the eager curiosity he hadexpected, belonged to the face of the little shop girl who had ceased toexist. He saw none of it in the face of his wife; even anger or hatred wouldhave been preferable to her level, attentive glance; the glance was worsethan accusing, it was inquiring.

"What deal, Jim?"

"What do you mean, what deal? Why are you suspicious? Why do you have tostart prying at once?"

"I'm sorry. I didn't know it was confidential. You don't have to answerme. "

"It's not confidential." He waited, but she remained silent. "Well?Aren't you going to say anything?"

"Why, no." She said it simply, as if to please him.

"So you're not interested at all?"

"But I thought you didn't want to discuss it."

"Oh, don't be so tricky!" he snapped. "It's a big business deal. That'swhat you admire, isn't it, big business? Well, it's bigger than anythingthose boys ever dreamed of. They spend their lives grubbing for theirfortunes penny by penny, while I can do it like that"—he snapped his fingers—"just like that. It's the biggest single stunt ever pulled."

"Stunt, Jim?"

"Deal!"

"And you did it? Yourself?"

"You bet I did it! That fat fool, Orren Boyle, couldn't have swung it in amillion years. This took knowledge and skill and timing"—he saw a spark ofinterest in her eyes—"and psychology." The spark vanished, but he wentrushing heedlessly on. "One had to know how to approach Wesley, and how tokeep the wrong influences away from him, and how to get Mr. Thompson

interested without letting him know too much, and how to cut Chick Morrisonin on it, but keep Tinky Holloway out, and how to get the right people togive a few parties for Wesley at the right time, and . . . Say, Cherryl, isthere any champagne in this house?""Champagne?"

"Can't we do something special tonight? Can't we have a sort ofcelebration together?"

"We can have champagne, yes, Jim, of course."

She rang the bell and gave the orders, in her odd, lifeless, uncriticalmanner, a manner of meticulous compliance with his wishes while volunteeringnone of her own.

"You don't seem to be very impressed," he said. "But what would you knowabout business, anyway? You wouldn't be able to understand anything on solarge a scale. Wait till September second. Wait till they hear about it."

"They? Who?"

He glanced at her, as if he had let a dangerous word slip outinvoluntarily, "We've organized a setup where we—me, Orren and a few friends-are going to control every industrial property south of the border."

"Whose property?"

"Why . . . the people's. This is not an old-fashioned grab for privateprofit. It's a deal with a mission—a worthy, public-spirited mission—tomanage the nationalized properties of the various People's States of SouthAmerica, to teach their workers our modern techniques of production, to helpthe underprivileged who've never had a chance, to—" He broke off abruptly,though she had merely sat looking at him without shifting her glance. "Youknow," he said suddenly, with a cold little chuckle, "if you're so damnanxious to hide that you came from the slums, you ought to be lessindifferent to the philosophy of social welfare. It's always the poor wholack humanitarian instincts. One has to be born to wealth in order to knowthe finer feelings of altruism."

"I've never tried to hide that I came from the slums," she said in thesimple, impersonal tone of a factual correction. "And I haven't any sympathyfor that welfare philosophy. I've seen enough of them to know what makes thekind of poor who want something for nothing."

He did not answer, and she added suddenly, her voice astonished, but firm,as if in final confirmation of a long-standing doubt, "Jim, you don't careabout it, either. You don't care about any of that welfare hogwash."

"Well, if money is all that you're interested in," he snapped, "let metell you that that deal will bring me a fortune. That's what you've alwaysadmired, isn't it, wealth?"

"It depends."

"I think I'll end up as one of the richest men in the world," he said; hedid not ask what her admiration depended upon. "There's nothing I won't beable to afford. Nothing. Just name it. I can give you anything you want. Goon, name it."

"I don't want anything, Jim."

"But I'd like to give you a present! To celebrate the occasion, see?Anything you take it into your head to ask. Anything. I can do it. I wantto show you that I can do it. Any fancy you care to name.""I haven't any fancies.""Oh, come on! Want a yacht?""No. "

"Want me to buy you the whole neighborhood where you lived in Buffalo?""No. "

"Want the crown jewels of the People's State of England? They can be had,you know. That People's State has been hinting about it on the black marketfor a long time. But there aren't any old-fashioned tycoons left who're able

to afford it. I'm able to afford it—or will be, after September second. Wantit?"

"No. "

"Then what do you want?"

"I don't want anything, Jim."

"But you've got to! You've got to want something, damn you!"She looked at him, faintly startled, but otherwise indifferent."Oh, all right, I'm sorry," he said; he seemed astonished by his own 87!outbreak. "I just wanted to please you," he added sullenly, "but I guessyou can't understand it at all. You don't know how important it is.You don't know how big a man you're married to."

"I'm trying to find out," she said slowly, "Do you still think, as youused to, that Hank Rearden is a great man?""Yes, Jim, I do."

"Well, I've got him beaten. I'm greater than any of them, greater thanRearden and greater than that other lover of my sister's, who—"He stopped, as if he had slid too far.

"Jim," she asked evenly, "what is going to happen on September second?"

He glanced up at her, from under his forehead—a cold glance, while hismuscles creased into a semi-smile, as if in cynical breach of some hallowedrestraint. "They're going to nationalize d'Anconia Copper," he said.

He heard the long, harsh roll of a motor, as a plane went by somewhere inthe darkness above the roof, then a thin tinkle, as a piece of ice settled,melting, in the silver bowl of his fruit cup—before she answered. She said,"He was your friend, wasn't he?"

"Oh, shut up!"

He remained silent, not looking at her. When his eyes came back to herface, she was still watching him and she spoke first, her voice oddly stern:"What your sister did in her radio broadcast was great."

"Yes, I know, I know, you've been saying that for a month."

"You've never answered me."

"What is there to ans . . . ?"

"Just as your friends in Washington have never answered her." He remainedsilent. "Jim, I'm not dropping the subject." He did not answer.

"Your friends in Washington never uttered a word about it. They did notdeny the things she said, they did not explain, they did not try to justifythemselves. They acted as if she had never spoken. I think they're hopingthat people will forget it. Some people will. But the rest of us know whatshe said and that your friends were afraid to fight her."

"That's not true! The proper action was taken and the incident is closedand I don't see why you keep bringing it up."

"What action?"

"Bertram Scudder was taken off the air, as a program not in the publicinterest at the present time.""Does that answer her?"

"It closes the issue and there's nothing more to be said about it."

"About a government that works by blackmail and extortion?"

"You can't say that nothing was done. It's been publicly announced thatScudder's programs were disruptive, destructive and untrustworthy."

"Jim, I want to understand this. Scudder wasn't on her side—he was onyours. He didn't even arrange that broadcast. He was acting on orders fromWashington, wasn't he?"

"I thought you didn't like Bertram Scudder."

"I didn't and I don't, but-"

"Then what do you care?"

"But he was innocent, as far as your friends were concerned, wasn't he?""I wish you wouldn't bother with politics. You talk like a fool."

"He was innocent, wasn't he?""So what?"

She looked at him, her eyes incredulously wide. "Then they just made himthe scapegoat, didn't they?"

"Oh, don't sit there looking like Eddie Willers!""Do I? I like Eddie Willers. He's honest."

"He's a damn half-wit who doesn't have the faintest idea of how to dealwith practical reality!"

"But you do, don't you, Jim?""You bet I do!"

"Then couldn't you have helped Scudder?"

"I?" He burst into helpless, angry laughter. "Oh, why don't you grow up? Idid my best to get Scudder thrown to the lions! Somebody had to be. Don't youknow that it was my neck, if some other hadn't been found?"

"Your neck? Why not Dagny's, if she was wrong? Because she wasn't?"

"Dagny is in an entirely different category! It had to be Scudder or me."

"Why?"

"And it's much better for national policy to let it be Scudder. This way,it's not necessary to argue about what she said—and if anybody brings it up,we start howling that it was said on Scudder's program and that Scudder'sprograms have been discredited and that Scudder is a proven fraud and liar,etc., etc.—and do you think the public will be able to unscramble it?Nobody's ever trusted Bertram Scudder, anyway.

Oh, don't stare at me like that! Would you rather they'd picked me todiscredit?"

"Why not Dagny? Because her speech could not be discredited?"

"If you're so damn sorry for Bertram Scudder, you should have seen him tryhis damndest to make them break my neck! He's been doing that for years—howdo you think he got to where he was, except by climbing on carcasses? Hethought he was pretty powerful, too—you should have seen how the big businesstycoons used to be afraid of him! But he got himself outmaneuvered, thistime. This time, he belonged to the wrong faction."

Dimly, through the pleasant stupor of relaxing, of sprawling back in hischair and smiling, he knew that this was the enjoyment he wanted: to behimself. To be himself—he thought, in the drugged, precarious state offloating past the deadliest of his blind alleys, the one that led to thequestion of what was himself.

"You see, he belonged to the Tinky Holloway faction. It was pretty much ofa seesaw for a while, between the Tinky Holloway faction and the ChickMorrison faction. But we won. Tinky made a deal and agreed to scuttle his palBertram in exchange for a few things he needed from us. You should have heardBertram howl! But he was a dead duck and he knew it."

He started on a rolling chuckle, but choked it off, as the haze clearedand he saw his wife's face. "Jim," she whispered, "is that the sort of . . .victories you're winning?"

"Oh, for Christ's sake!" he screamed, smashing his fist down on the table."Where have you been all these years? What sort of world do you think you'reliving in?" His blow had upset his water glass and the water went spreadingin dark stains over the lace of the tablecloth.

"I'm trying to find out," she whispered. Her shoulders were sagging andher face looked suddenly worn, an odd, aged look that seemed haggard andlost.

"I couldn't help it!" he burst out in the silence. "I'm not to blame! Ihave to take things as I find them! It's not I who've made this world!"

He was shocked to see that she smiled—a smile of so fiercely bitter acontempt that it seemed incredible on her gently patient face; she was not

looking at him, but at some image of her own. "That's what my father used tosay when he got drunk at the corner saloon instead of looking for work."

"How dare you try comparing me to—" he started, but did not finish,because she was not listening.

Her words, when she looked at him again, astonished him as completelyirrelevant. "The date of that nationalization, September second,"

she asked, her voice wistful, "was it you who picked it?"

"No. I had nothing to do with it. It's the date of some special session oftheir legislature. Why?"

"It's the date of our first wedding anniversary."

"Oh? Oh, that's right!" He smiled, relieved at the change to a safesubject. "We'll have been married a year. My, it doesn't seem that long!""It seems much longer," she said tonelessly.

She was looking off again, and he felt in sudden uneasiness that thesubject was not safe at all; he wished she would not look as if she wereseeing the whole course of that year and of their marriage.

. . . not to get scared, but to learn—she thought—the thing to do is notto get scared, but to learn . . . The words came from a sentence she hadrepeated to herself so often that it felt like a pillar polished smooth bythe helpless weight of her body, the pillar that had supported her throughthe past year. She tried to repeat it, but she felt as if her hands wereslipping on the polish, as if the sentence would not stave off terror anylonger—because she was beginning to understand.

If you don't know, the thing to do is not to get scared, but to learn.

. . . It was in the bewildered loneliness of the first weeks of hermarriage that she said it to herself for the first time. She could notunderstand Jim's behavior, or his sullen anger, which looked like weakness,or his evasive, incomprehensible answers to her questions, which sounded likecowardice; such traits were not possible in the James Taggart whom she hadmarried. She told herself that she could not condemn without understanding,that she knew nothing about his world, that the extent of her ignorance wasthe extent to which she misinterpreted his actions. She took the blame, shetook the beating of self reproach—against some bleakly stubborn certaintywhich told her that something was wrong and that the thing she felt was fear.

"I must learn everything that Mrs. James Taggart is expected to know andto be." was the way she explained her purpose to a teacher of etiquette. Sheset out to learn with the devotion, the discipline, the drive of a militarycadet or a religious novice. It was the only way, she thought, of earning theheight which her husband had granted her on trust, of living up to his visionof her, which it was now her duty to achieve. And, not wishing to confess itto herself, she felt also that at the end of the long task she wouldrecapture her vision of him, that knowledge would bring back to her the manshe had seen on the night of his railroad's triumph.

She could not understand Jim's attitude when she told him about herlessons. He burst out laughing; she was unable to believe that the laughterhad a sound of malicious contempt. "Why, Jim? Why? What are you laughing at?"He would not explain—almost as if the fact of his contempt were sufficientand required no reasons.

She could not suspect him of malice: he was too patiently generous abouther mistakes. He seemed eager to display her in the best drawing rooms of thecity, and he never uttered a word of reproach for her ignorance, for herawkwardness, for those terrible moments when a silent exchange of glancesamong the guests and a burst of blood to her cheekbones told her that she hadsaid the wrong thing again. He showed no embarrassment, he merely watched herwith a faint smile.

When they came home after one of those evenings, his mood seemedaffectionately cheerful. He was trying to make it easier for her, shethought—and gratitude drove her to study the harder.

She expected her reward on the evening when, by some imperceptibletransition, she found herself enjoying a party for the first time. She feltfree to act, not by rules, but at her own pleasure, with sudden confidencethat the rules had fused into a natural habit—she knew that she wasattracting attention, but now, for the first time, it was not the attentionof ridicule, but of admiration—she was sought after, on her own merit, shewas Mrs. Taggart, she had ceased being an object of charity weighing Jimdown, painfully tolerated for his sake—she was laughing gaily and seeing thesmiles of response, of appreciation on the faces around her—and she keptglancing at him across the room, radiantly, like a child handing him a reportcard with a perfect score, begging him to be proud of her. Jim sat alone in acorner, watching her with an undecipherable glance.

He would not speak to her on their way home. "I don't know why I keepdragging myself to those parties," he snapped suddenly, tearing off his dresstie in the middle of their living room, "I've never sat through such avulgar, boring waste of time!" "Why, Jim," she said, stunned, "I thought itwas wonderful." "You would! You seemed to be quite at home—quite as if itwere Coney Island. I wish you'd learn to keep your place and not to embarrassme in public." "[ embarrassed you? Tonight?" "You did!" "How?" "If you don'tunderstand it, I can't explain," he said in the tone of a mystic who impliesthat a lack of understanding is the confession of a shameful inferiority. "Idon't understand it," she said firmly. He walked out of the room, slammingthe door.

She felt that the inexplicable was not a mere blank, this time: it had atinge of evil. From that night on, a small, hard point of fear remainedwithin her, like the spot of a distant headlight advancing upon her down aninvisible track.

Knowledge did not seem to bring her a clearer vision of Jim's world, butto make the mystery greater. She could not believe that she was supposed tofeel respect for the dreary senselessness of the art shows which his friendsattended, of the novels they read, of the political magazines they discussed—the art shows, where she saw the kind of drawings she had seen chalked on anypavement of her childhood's slums—the novels, that purported to prove thefutility of science, industry, civilization and love, using language that herfather would not have used in his drunkenest moments—the magazines, thatpropounded cowardly generalities, less clear and more stale than the sermonsfor which she had condemned the preacher of the slum mission as a mealy-mouthed old fraud.

She could not believe that these things were the culture she had soreverently looked up to and so eagerly waited to discover. She felt as if shehad climbed a mountain toward a jagged shape that had looked like a castleand had found it to be the crumbling ruin of a gutted warehouse.

"Jim, " she said once, after an evening spent among the men who were calledthe intellectual leaders of the country, "Dr. Simon Pritchett is a phony—amean, scared old phony." "Now, really," he answered, "do you think you'requalified to pass judgment on philosophers?"

"I'm qualified to pass judgment on con men. I've seen enough of them toknow one when I see him." "Now this is why I say that you'll never outgrowyour background. If you had, you would have learned to appreciate Dr.Pritchett's philosophy." "What philosophy?" "If you don't understand it, Ican't explain." She would not let him end the conversation on that favoriteformula of his. "Jim," she said, "he's a phony, he and Balph Eubank and thatwhole gang of theirs—and I think you've been taken in by them." Instead of

the anger she expected, she saw a brief flash of amusement in the lift of hiseyelids. "That's what you think," he answered.

She felt an instant of terror at the first touch of a concept she had notknown to be possible: What if Jim was not taken in by them? She couldunderstand the phoniness of Dr. Pritchett, she thought—it was a racket thatgave him an undeserved income; she could even admit the possibility, by now,that Jim might be a phony in his own business; what she could not hold insideher mind was the concept of Jim as a phony in a racket from which he gainednothing, an unpaid phony, an unvenal phony; the phoniness of a cardsharp or acon man seemed innocently wholesome by comparison. She could not conceive ofhis motive; she felt only that the headlight moving upon her had grownlarger.

She could not remember by what steps, what accumulation of pain, first assmall scratches of uneasiness, then as stabs of bewilderment, then as thechronic, nagging pull of fear, she had begun to doubt Jim's position on therailroad. It was his sudden, angry "so you don't trust me?" snapped in answerto her first, innocent questions that made her realize that she did not—whenthe doubt had not yet formed in her mind and she had fully expected that hisanswers would reassure her. She had learned, in the slums of her childhood,that honest people were never touchy about the matter of being trusted, "Idon't care to talk shop," was his answer whenever she mentioned the railroad.She tried to plead with him once. "Jim, you know what I think of your workand how much I admire you for it." "Oh, really?

What is it you married, a man or a railroad president?" "I ... I neverthought of separating the two." "Well, it is not very flattering to me." Shelooked at him, baffled: she had thought it was. "I'd like to believe," hesaid, "that you love me for myself, and not for my railroad." "Oh God, Jim,"she gasped, "you didn't think that I—!" "No,"

he said, with a sadly generous smile, "I didn't think that you married mefor my money or my position. I have never doubted you." Realizing, in stunnedconfusion and in tortured fairness, that she might have given him ground tomisinterpret her feeling, that she had forgotten how many bitterdisappointments he must have suffered at the hands of fortune-hunting women,she could do nothing but shake her head and moan, "Oh, Jim, that's not what Imeant!" He chuckled softly, as at a child, and slipped his arm around her."Do you love me?" he asked. "Yes," she whispered. "Then you must have faithin me. Love is faith, you know. Don't you see that I need it? I don't trustanyone around me, I have nothing but enemies, I am very lonely. Don't youknow that I need you?"

The thing that made her pace her room—hours later, in torturedrestlessness—was that she wished desperately to believe him and did notbelieve a word of it, yet knew that it was true.

It was true, but not in the manner he implied, not in any manner ormeaning she could ever hope to grasp. It was true that he needed her, but thenature of his need kept slipping past her every effort to define it. She didnot know what he wanted of her. It was not flattery that he wanted, she hadseen him listening to the obsequious compliments of liars, listening with alook of resentful inertness—almost the look of a drug addict at a doseinadequate to rouse him. But she had seen him look at her as if he werewaiting for some reviving shot and, at times, as if he were begging. She hadseen a flicker of life in his eyes whenever she granted him some sign ofadmiration—yet a burst of anger was his answer, whenever she named a reasonfor admiring him.

He seemed to want her to consider him great, but never dare ascribe anyspecific content to his greatness.

She did not understand the night, in mid-April, when he returned from atrip to Washington. "Hi, kid!" he said loudly, dropping a sheaf of lilac into

her arms. "Happy days are here again! Just saw those flowers and thought ofyou. Spring is coming, baby!"

He poured himself a drink and paced the room, talking with too light, toobrash a manner of gaiety. There was a feverish sparkle in his eyes, and hisvoice seemed shredded by some unnatural excitement. She began to wonderwhether he was elated or crushed.

"I know what it is that they're planning!" he said suddenly, withouttransition, and she glanced up at him swiftly: she knew the sound of one ofhis inner explosions. "There's not a dozen people in the whole country whoknow it, but I do! The top boys are keeping it secret till they're ready tospring it on the nation. Will it surprise a lot of people!

Will it knock them flat! A lot of people? Hell, every single person inthis country! It will affect every single person. That's how important itis . "

"Affect-how, Jim?"

"It will affect them! And they don't know what's coming, but I do.

There they sit tonight"—he waved at the lighted windows of the city—

"making plans, counting their money, hugging their children or theirdreams, and they don't know, but I do, that all of it will be struck,stopped, changed!"

"Changed—for the worse or the better?"

"For the better, of course," he answered impatiently, as if it wereirrelevant; his voice seemed to lose its fire and to slip into the fraudulentsound of duty. "It's a plan to save the country, to stop our economicdecline, to hold things still, to achieve stability and security."

"What plan?"

"I can't tell you. It's secret. Top secret. You have no idea how manypeople would like to know it. There's no industrialist who wouldn't give adozen of his best furnaces for just one hint of warning, which he's not goingto get! Like Hank Rearden, for instance, whom you admire so much." Hechuckled, looking off into the future.

"Jim," she asked, the sound of fear in her voice telling him what thesound of his chuckle had been like, "why do you hate Hank Rearden?"

"I don't hate him!" He whirled to her, and his face, incredibly, lookedanxious, almost frightened. "I never said I hated him. Don't worry, he'llapprove of the plan. Everybody will. It's for everybody's good." He soundedas if he were pleading. She felt the dizzying certainty that he was lying,yet that the plea was sincere—as if he had a desperate need to reassure her,but not about the things he said.

She forced herself to smile. "Yes, Jim, of course," she answered,wondering what instinct in what impossible kind of chaos had made her say itas if it were her part to reassure him.

The look she saw on his face was almost a smile and almost of gratitude."1 had to tell you about it tonight. I had to tell you. I wanted you to knowwhat tremendous issues I deal with. You always talk about my work, but youdon't understand it at all, it's so much wider than you imagine. You thinkthat running a railroad is a matter of track laying and fancy metals andgetting trains there on time. But it's not.

Any underling can do that. The real heart of a railroad is in Washington.My job is politics. Politics. Decisions made on a national scale, affectingeverything, controlling everybody. A few words on paper, a directive—changingthe life of every person in every nook, cranny and penthouse of thiscountry!"

"Yes, Jim," she said, wishing to believe that he was, perhaps, a man ofstature in the mysterious realm of Washington.

"You'll see," he said, pacing the room. "You think they're powerful —thosegiants of industry who're so clever with motors and furnaces?

They'll be stopped! They'll be stripped! They'll be brought down! They'llbe—" He noticed the way she was staring at him. "It's not for ourselves," hesnapped hastily, "it's for the people. That's the difference between businessand politics—we have no selfish ends in view, no private motives, we're notafter profit, we don't spend our lives scrambling for money, we don't haveto! That's why we're slandered and misunderstood by all the greedy profit-chasers who can't conceive of a spiritual motive or a moral ideal or . . .Wecouldn't help it!" he cried suddenly, whirling to her. "We had to have thatplan! With everything falling to pieces and stopping, something had to bedone! We had to stop them from stopping! We couldn't help it!"

His eyes were desperate; she did not know whether he was boasting orbegging for forgiveness; she did not know whether this was triumph or terror."Jim, don't you feel well? Maybe you've worked too hard and you're worn outand—"

"I've never felt better in my life!" he snapped, resuming his pacing.

"You bet I've worked hard. My work is bigger than any job you can hope toimagine. It's above anything that grubbing mechanics like Rearden and mysister, are doing. Whatever they do, I can undo it. Let them build a track—Ican come and break it, just like that!"

He snapped his fingers. "Just like breaking a spine'"

"You want to break spines?" she whispered, trembling.

"I haven't said that!" he screamed. "What's the matter with you? I haven'tsaid it!"

"I'm sorry, Jim!" she gasped, shocked by her own words and by the terrorin his eyes. "It's just that I don't understand, but . . . but I know Ishouldn't bother you with questions when you're so tired"—

she was struggling desperately to convince herself—"when you have so manythings on your mind . . . such . . . such great things . . .

things I can't even begin to think of . . ."

His shoulders sagged, relaxing. He approached her and dropped wearily downon his knees, slipping his arms around her. "You poor little fool," he saidaffectionately.

She held onto him, moved by something that felt like tenderness and almostlike pity. But he raised his head to glance up at her face, and it seemed toher that the look she saw in his eyes was part-gratification, part-contempt—almost as if, by some unknown kind of sanction, she had absolved him anddamned herself.

It was useless—she found in the days that followed—to tell herself thatthese things were beyond her understanding, that it was her duty to believein him, that love was faith. Her doubt kept growing—doubt of hisincomprehensible work and of his relation to the railroad. She wondered whyit kept growing in direct proportion to her self-admonitions that faith wasthe duty she owed him. Then, one sleepless night, she realized that hereffort to fulfill that duty consisted of turning away whenever peoplediscussed his job, of refusing to look at newspaper mentions of TaggartTranscontinental, of slamming her mind shut against any evidence and everycontradiction. She stopped, aghast, struck by the question: What is it, then-faith versus truth? And realizing that part of her zeal to believe was herfear to know, she set out to learn the truth, with a cleaner, calmer sense ofTightness than the effort at dutiful self-fraud had ever given her.

It did not take her long to learn. The evasiveness of the Taggartexecutives, when she asked a few casual questions, the stale generalities oftheir answers, the strain of their manner at the mention of their boss, andtheir obvious reluctance to discuss him—told her nothing concrete, but gaveher a feeling equivalent to knowing the worst. The railroad workers were morespecific—the switchmen, the gatemen, the ticket sellers whom she drew intochance conversations in the Taggart Terminal and who did not know her. "Jim

Taggart? That whining, sniveling, speech-making deadhead!" "Jimmy thePresident? Well, I'll tell you: he's the hobo on the gravy train." "The boss?Mr. Taggart? You mean Miss Taggart, don't you?"

It was Eddie Willers who told her the whole truth. She heard that he hadknown Jim since childhood, and she asked him to lunch with her.

When she faced him at the table, when she saw the earnest, questioningdirectness of his eyes and the severely literal simplicity of his words, shedropped all attempts at casual prodding, she told him what she wanted to knowand why, briefly, impersonally, not appealing for help or for pity, only fortruth. He answered her in the same manner. He told her the whole story,quietly, impersonally, pronouncing no verdict, expressing no opinion, neverencroaching on her emotions by any sign of concern for them, speaking withthe shining austerity and the awesome power of facts. He told her who ranTaggart Transcontinental.

He told her the story of the John Gait Line. She listened, and what shefelt was not shock, but worse: the lack of shock, as if she had always knownit. "Thank you, Mr. Willers," was all that she said when he finished.

She waited for Jim to come home, that evening, and the thing that erodedany pain or indignation, was a feeling of her own detachment, as if it didnot matter to her any longer, as if some action were required of her, but itmade no difference what the action would be or the consequences.

It was not anger that she felt when she saw Jim enter the room, but amurky astonishment, almost as if she wondered who he was and why it shouldnow be necessary to speak to him. She told him what she knew, briefly, in atired, extinguished voice. It seemed to her that he understood it from herfirst few sentences, as if he had expected this to come sooner or later.

"Why didn't you tell me the truth?" she asked.

"So that's your idea of gratitude?" he screamed. "So that's how you feelafter everything I've done for you? Everybody told me that crudeness andselfishness was all I could expect for lifting a cheap little alley cat bythe scruff of her neck!"

She looked at him as if he were making inarticulate sounds that connectedto nothing inside her mind. "Why didn't you tell me the truth?"

"Is that all the love you felt for me, you sneaky little hypocrite? Is.

that all I get in return for my faith in you?"

"Why did you lie? Why did you let me think what I thought?"

"You should be ashamed of yourself, you should be ashamed to face me orspeak to me!"

"1?" The inarticulate sounds had connected, but she could not believe thesum they made. "What are you trying to do, Jim?" she asked, her voiceincredulous and distant.

"Have you thought of my feelings? Have you thought of what this.

would do to my feelings? You should have considered my feelings first!

That's the first obligation of any wife—and of a woman in your position inparticular! There's nothing lower and uglier than ingratitude!"

For the flash of one instant, she grasped the unthinkable fact of a manwho was guilty and knew it and was trying to escape by inducing an emotion ofguilt in his victim. But she could not hold the fact inside her brain. Shefelt a stab of horror, the convulsion of a mind rejecting a sight that woulddestroy it—a stab like a swift recoil from the edge of insanity. By the timeshe dropped her head, closing her eyes, she knew only that she felt disgust,a sickening disgust for a nameless reason.

When she raised her head, it seemed to her-that she caught a glimpse ofhim watching her with the uncertain, retreating, calculating look of a manwhose trick has not worked. But before she had time to believe it, his facewas hidden again under an expression of injury and anger.

She said, as if she were naming her thoughts for the benefit of therational being who was not present, but whose presence she had to assume,since no other could be addressed, "That night . . . those headlines . . .that glory ... it was not you at all ... it was Dagny."

"Shut up, you rotten little bitch!"

She looked at him blankly, without reaction. She looked as if nothingcould reach her, because her dying words had been uttered.

He made the sound of a sob. "Cherryl, I'm sorry, I didn't mean it, I takeit back, I didn't mean it . . ."

She remained standing, leaning against the wall, as she had stood from thefirst.

He dropped down on the edge of a couch, in a posture of helplessdejection. "How could I have explained it to you?" he said in the tone ofabandoning hope. "It's all so big and so complex. How could I have told youanything about a transcontinental railroad, unless you knew all the detailsand ramifications? How could I have explained to you my years of work, my . .. Oh, what's the use? I've always been misunderstood and I should have beenaccustomed to it by now, only I thought that you were different and that Ihad a chance."

"Jim, why did you marry me?"

He chuckled sadly. "That's what everybody kept asking me. I didn't thinkyou'd ever ask it. Why? Because I love you."

She wondered at how strange it was that this word—which was supposed to bethe simplest in the human language, the word understood by all, the universalbond among men—conveyed to her no meaning whatever. She did not know what itwas that it named in his mind.

"Nobody's ever loved me," he said. "There isn't any love in the world.People don't feel. I feel things. Who cares about that? All they care for istime schedules and freight loads and money. I can't live among those people.I'm very lonely. I've always longed to find understanding. Maybe I'm just ahopeless idealist, looking for the impossible.

Nobody will ever understand me."

"Jim," she said, with an odd little note of severity in her voice, "whatI've struggled for all this time is to understand you."

He dropped his hand in a motion of brushing her words aside, notoffensively, but sadly. "I thought you could. You're all I have. But maybeunderstanding is just not possible between human beings."

"Why should it be impossible? Why don't you tell me what it is that youwant? Why don't you help me to understand you?"

He sighed. "That's it. That's the trouble—your asking all those why's.Your constant asking of a why for everything. What I'm talking about can't beput into words. It can't be named. It has to be felt.

Either you feel it or you don't. It's not a thing of the mind, but of theheart. Don't you ever feel? Just feel, without asking all those questions?Can't you understand me as a human being, not as if I were a scientificobject in a laboratory? The great understanding that transcends our shabbywords and helpless minds . . . No, I guess I shouldn't look for it. But I'llalways seek and hope. You're my last hope. You're all I have."

She stood at the wall, without moving.

"I need you," he wailed softly. "Fm all alone. You're not like the others.I believe in you. I trust you. What has all that money and fame and businessand struggle given me? You're all I have ..."

She stood without moving and the direction of her glance, lowered to lookdown at him, was the only form of recognition she gave him.

The things he said about his suffering were lies, she thought; but thesuffering was real; he was a man torn by some continual anguish, which heseemed unable to tell her, but which, perhaps, she could learn to understand.

She still owed him this much—she thought, with the grayness of a sense ofduty—in payment for the position he had given her, which, perhaps, was all hehad to give, she owed him an effort to understand him.

It was strange to feel, in the days that followed, that she had become astranger to herself, a stranger who had nothing to want or to seek. In placeof a love made by the brilliant fire of hero worship, she was left with thegnawing drabness of pity. In place of the men she had struggled to find, menwho fought for their goals and refused to suffer—she was left with a manwhose suffering was his only claim to value and his only offer in exchangefor her life. But it made no difference to her any longer. The one who wasshe, had looked with eagerness at the turn of every corner ahead; the passivestranger who had taken her place, was like all the over groomed people aroundher, the people who said that they were adult because they did not try tothink or to desire.

But the stranger was still haunted by a ghost who was herself, and theghost had a mission to accomplish. She had to learn to understand the thingsthat had destroyed her. She had to know, and she lived with a sense ofceaseless waiting. She had to know, even though she felt that the headlightwas closer and in the moment of knowledge she would be struck by the wheels.

What do you want of me?—was the question that kept beating in her mind asa clue. What do you want of me?—she kept crying soundlessly, at dinnertables, in drawing rooms, on sleepless nights— crying it to Jim and those whoseemed to share his secret, to Balph Eubank, to Dr. Simon Pritchett—what doyou want of me? She did not ask it aloud; she knew that they would notanswer. What do you want of me?

—she asked, feeling as if she were running, but no way were open toescape. What do you want of me?—she asked, looking at the whole long tortureof her marriage that had not lasted the full span of one year.

"What do you want of me?" she asked aloud—and saw that she was sitting atthe table in her dining room, looking at Jim, at his feverish face, and at adrying stain of water on the table.

She did not know how long a span of silence had stretched between them,she was startled by her own voice and by the--question she had not intendedto utter. She did not expect him to understand it, he had never seemed tounderstand much simpler queries—and she shook her head, struggling torecapture the reality of the present.

She was startled to see him looking at her with a touch of derision, as ifhe were mocking her estimate of his understanding.

"Love," he answered.

She felt herself sagging with hopelessness, in the face of that answerwhich was at once so simple and so meaningless.

"You don't love me," he said accusingly. She did not answer. "You don'tlove me or you wouldn't ask such a question."

"I did love you once," she said dully, "but it wasn't what you wanted. Iloved you for your courage, your ambition, your ability. But it wasn't real,any of it."

His lower lip swelled a little in a faint, contemptuous thrust. "What ashabby idea of love!" he said.

"Jim, what is it that you want to be loved for?""What a cheap shopkeeper's attitude!"

She did not speak; she looked at him, her eyes stretched by a silentquestion.

"To be loved for!" he said, his voice grating with mockery andrighteousness. "So you think that love is a matter of mathematics, ofexchange, of weighing and measuring, like a pound of butter on a grocerycounter? I don't want to be loved for anything. I want to be loved for

myself—not for anything I do or have or say or think. For myself—not for mybody or mind or words or works or actions.""But then . . . what is yourself?"

"If you loved me, you wouldn't ask it." His voice had a shrill note ofnervousness, as if he were swaying dangerously between caution and someblindly heedless impulse. "You wouldn't ask. You'd know. You'd feel it. Whydo you always try to tag and label everything? Can't you rise above thosepetty materialistic definitions? Don't you ever feel-just feel?"

"Yes. Jim, I do," she said, her voice low. "But I am trying not to,because . . . because what T feel is fear.""Of me?" he asked hopefully.

"No, not exactly. Not fear of what you can do to me, but of what you are."

He dropped his eyelids with the swiftness of slamming a door—but shecaught a flash of his eyes and the flash, incredibly, was terror.

"You're not capable of love, you cheap little gold-digger!" he criedsuddenly, in a tone stripped of all color but the desire "to hurt. "Yes, Isaid gold-digger. There are many forms of it, other than greed for money,other and worse. You're a gold-digger of the spirit. You didn't marry me formy cash—but you married me for my ability or courage or whatever value it wasthat you set as the price of your love!"

"Do you want . . . love . . . to be . . . causeless?"

"Love is its own cause! Love is above causes and reasons. Love is blind.But you wouldn't be capable of it. You have the mean, scheming, calculatinglittle soul of a shopkeeper who trades', but never gives!

Love is a gift—a great, free, unconditional gift that transcends andforgives everything. What's the generosity of loving a man for his virtues?

What do you give him? Nothing. It's no more than cold justice. No morethan he's earned."

Her eyes were dark with the dangerous intensity of glimpsing her goal."You want it to be unearned," she said, not in the tone of a question, but ofa verdict.

"Oh, you don't understand!"

"Yes, Jim, I do. That's what you want—that's what all of you really want-not money, not material benefits, not economic security, not any of thehandouts you keep demanding." She spoke in a flat monotone, as if recitingher thoughts to herself, intent upon giving the solid identity of words tothe torturous shreds of chaos twisting in her mind.

"All of you welfare preachers—it's not unearned money that you're after.You want handouts, but of a different kind. I'm a gold-digger of the spirit,you said, because I look for value. Then you, the welfare preachers . . .it's the spirit that you want to loot. I never thought and nobody ever toldus how it could be thought of and what it would mean—the unearned in spirit.But that is what you want. You want unearned love. You want unearnedadmiration. You want unearned greatness. You want to be a man like HankRearden without the necessity of being what he is. Without the necessity ofbeing anything.

Without . . . the necessity ... of being."

"Shut up!" he screamed.

They looked at each other, both in terror, both feeling as if they wereswaying on an edge which she could not and he would not name, both knowingthat one more step would be fatal.

"What do you think you're saying?" he asked in a tone of petty anger,which sounded almost benevolent by bringing them back into the realm of thenormal, into the near-wholesomeness of nothing worse than a family quarrel."What sort of metaphysical subject are you trying to deal with?"

"I don't know . . ." she said wearily, dropping her head, as if some shapeshe had tried to capture had slipped once more out of her grasp. "I don'tknow ... It doesn't seem possible . . ."

"You'd better not try to wade in way over your head or—" But he had tostop, because the butler entered, bringing the glittering ice bucket with thechampagne ordered for celebration.

They remained silent, letting the room be filled by the sounds whichcenturies of men and of struggle had established as the symbol of joyousattainment: the blast of the cork, the laughing tinkle of a pale gold liquidrunning into two broad cups filled with the weaving reflections of candles,the whisper of bubbles rising through two crystal stems, almost demandingthat everything in sight rise, too, in the same aspiration.

They remained silent, till the butler had gone. Taggart sat looking downat the bubbles, holding the stem of his glass between two limply casualfingers. Then his hand closed suddenly about the stem into an awkwardlyconvulsed fist and he raised it, not as one lifts a glass of champagne, butas one would lift a butcher knife.

"To Francisco d'Anconia!" he said.

She put her glass down. "No," she answered.

"Drink it!" he screamed.

"No," she answered, her voice like a drop of lead.

They held each other's glances for a moment, the light playing on thegolden liquid, not reaching their faces or eyes.

"Oh, go to hell!" he cried, leaping to his feet, flinging his glass tosmash on the floor and rushing out of the room.

She sat at the table, not moving, for a long time, then rose slowly andpressed the bell.

She walked to her room, her steps unnaturally even, she opened the door ofa closet, she reached for a suit and a pair of shoes, she took off thehousecoat, moving with cautious precision, as if her life depended on notjarring anything about or within her. She held onto a single thought: thatshe had to get out of this house—just get out of it for a while, if only forthe next hour—and then, later, she would be able to face all that had to befaced.

The lines were blurring on the paper before her and, raising her head,Dagny realized that it had long since grown dark.

She pushed the papers aside, unwilling to turn on the lamp, permittingherself the luxury of idleness and darkness. It cut her off from the citybeyond the windows of her living room. The calendar in the distance said:August 5.

The month behind her had gone, leaving nothing but the blank of dead time.It had gone into the planless, thankless work of racing from emergency toemergency, of delaying the collapse of a railroad—a month like a waste pileof disconnected days, each given to averting the disaster of the moment. Ithad not been a sum of achievements brought into existence, but only a sum ofzeros, of that which had not happened, a sum of prevented catastrophes—not atask in the service of life, but only a race against death.

There had been times when an unsummoned vision—a sight of the valley—hadseemed to rise before her, not as a sudden appearance, but as a constant,hidden presence that suddenly chose to assume an insistent reality. She hadfaced it, through moments of blinded stillness, in a contest between anunmoving decision and an unyielding pain, a pain to be fought byacknowledgment, by saying: All right, even this.

There had been mornings when, awakening with rays of sunlight on her face,she had thought that she must hurry to Hammond's Market to get fresh eggs forbreakfast; then, recapturing full consciousness, seeing the haze of New Yorkbeyond the window of her bedroom, she had felt a tearing stab, like a touch

of death, the touch of rejecting reality. You knew it—she had told herselfseverely—you knew what it would be like when you made your choice. Anddragging her body, like an unwilling weight, out of bed to face an unwelcomeday, she would whisper: All right, even this.

The worst of the torture had been the moments when, walking down thestreet, she had caught a sudden glimpse of chestnut-gold, a glowing streak ofhair among the heads of strangers, and had felt as if the city had vanished,as if nothing but the violent stillness within her were delaying the momentwhen she would rush to him and seize him; but that next moment had come asthe sight of some meaningless face—and she had stood, not wishing to livethrough the following step, not wishing to generate the energy of living. Shehad tried to avoid such moments; she had tried to forbid herself to look; shehad walked, keeping her eyes on the pavements. She had failed: by some willof their own, her eyes had kept leaping to every streak of gold.

She had kept the blinds raised on the windows of her office, rememberinghis promise, thinking only: If you are watching me, wherever you are . . .There were no buildings close to the height of her office, but she had lookedat the distant towers, wondering which window was his observation post,wondering whether some invention of his own, some device of rays and lenses,permitted him to observe her every movement from some skyscraper a block or amile away. She had sat at her desk, at her uncurtained windows, thinking:Just to know that you're seeing me, even if I'm never to see you again.

And remembering it, now, in the darkness of her room, she leaped to herfeet and snapped on the light.

Then she dropped her head for an instant, smiling in mirthless amusementat herself. She wondered whether her lighted windows, in the black immensityof the city, were a flare of distress, calling for his help—or a lighthousestill protecting the rest of the world.

The doorbell rang.

When she opened the door, she saw the silhouette of a girl with a faintlyfamiliar face—and it took her a moment of startled astonishment to realizethat it was Cherryl Taggart. Except for a formal exchange of greetings on afew chance encounters in the halls of the Taggart Building, they had not seeneach other since the wedding.

Cherryl's face was composed and unsmiling. "Would you permit me to speakto you"—she hesitated and ended on—"Miss Taggart?"

"Of course," said Dagny gravely. "Come in."

She sensed some desperate emergency in the unnatural calm of Cherryl'smanner; she became certain of it when she looked at the girl's face in thelight of the living room. "Sit down," she said, but Cherryl remainedstanding.

"I came to pay a debt," said Cherryl, her voice solemn with the effort topermit herself no sound of emotion. "I want to apologize for the things Isaid to you at my wedding. There's no reason why you should forgive me, butit's my place to tell you that I know I was insulting everything I admire anddefending everything I despise. I know that admitting it now, doesn't make upfor it, and even coming here is only another presumption, there's no reasonwhy you should want to hear it, so I can't even cancel the debt, I can onlyask for a favor-that you let me say the things I want to say to you."

Dagny's shock of emotion, incredulous, warm and painful, was the wordlessequivalent of the sentence: What a distance to travel in less than a year . .. ! She answered, the unsmiling earnestness of her voice like a hand extendedin support, knowing that a smile would upset some precarious balance, "But itdoes make up for it, and I do want to hear it."

"I know that it was you who ran Taggart Transcontinental. It was you whobuilt the John Gait Line. It was you who had the mind and the courage that

kept all of it alive. I suppose you thought that I married Jim for his money—as what shop girl wouldn't have? But, you see, I married Jim because I . . .I thought that he was you. I thought that he was Taggart Transcontinental.Now I know that he's"—

she hesitated, then went on firmly, as if not to spare herself anything—

"he's some sort of vicious moocher, though I can't understand of what kindor why. When I spoke to you at my wedding, I thought that I was defendinggreatness and attacking its enemy . . . but it was in reverse ... it was insuch horrible, unbelievable reverse! . . . So I wanted to tell you that Iknow the truth . . . not so much for your sake, I have no right to presumethat you'd care, but . . . but for the sake of the things I loved."

Dagny said slowly, "Of course I forgive it."

"Thank you," she whispered, and turned to go.

"Sit down."

She shook her head. "That . . . that was all, Miss Taggart."

Dagny allowed herself the first touch of a smile, no more than in the lookof her eyes, as she said, "Cherryl, my name is Dagny."

Cherryl's answer was no more than a faint, tremulous crease of her mouth,as if, together, they had completed a single smile. "I . . .

I didn't know whether I should—"

"We're sisters, aren't we?"

"No! Not through Jim!" It was an involuntary cry.

"No, through our own choice. Sit down, Cherryl." The girl obeyed,struggling not to show the eagerness of her acceptance, not to grasp forsupport, not to break. "You've had a terrible time, haven't you?"

"Yes . . . but that doesn't matter . . . that's my own problem . . . andmy own fault."

"I don't think it was your own fault."

Cherryl did not answer, then said suddenly, desperately, "Look . . .what I don't want is charity."

"Jim must have told you—and it's true—that I never engage in charity.""Yes, he did . . . But what I mean is—""I know what you mean."

"But there's no reason why you should have to feel concern for me ... Ididn't come here to complain and . . . and load another burden on yourshoulders . . . That I happen to suffer, doesn't give me a claim on you."

"No, it doesn't. But that you value all the things I value, does."

"You mean ... if you want to talk to me, it's not alms? Not just becauseyou feel sorry for me?"

"I feel terribly sorry for you, Cherryl, and I'd like to help you—

not because you suffer, but because you haven't deserved to suffer."

"You mean, you wouldn't be kind to anything weak or whining or rottenabout me? Only to whatever you see in me that's good?"

"Of course."

Cherryl did not move her head, but she looked as if it were lifted—

as if some bracing current were relaxing her features into that rare lookwhich combines pain and dignity.

"It's not alms, Cherryl. Don't be afraid to speak to me."

"It's strange . . . You're the first person I can talk to . . . and itfeels so easy . . . yet I ... I was afraid to speak to you. I wanted to askyour forgiveness long ago . . . ever since I learned the truth, I went as faras the door of your office, but I stopped and stood there in the hall anddidn't have the courage to go in. . . .1 didn't intend to come here tonight.I went out only to ... to think something over, and then, suddenly, I knewthat I wanted to see you, that in the whole of the city this was the onlyplace for me to go and the only thing still left for me to do."

"I'm glad you did."

"You know, Miss Tag—Dagny," she said softly, in wonder, "you're not as Iexpected you to be at all. . . . They, Jim and his friends, they said youwere hard and cold and unfeeling."

"But it's true, Cherryl. I am, in the sense they mean—only have they evertold you in just what sense they mean it?"

"No. They never do. They only sneer at me when I ask them what they meanby anything . . . about anything. What did they mean about you?"

"Whenever anyone accuses some person of being 'unfeeling,' he means thatthat person is just. He means that that person has no causeless emotions andwill not grant him a feeling which he does not deserve. He means that 'tofeel' is to go against reason, against moral values, against reality. Hemeans . . . What's the matter?" she asked, seeing the abnormal intensity ofthe girl's face.

"It's . . . it's something I've tried so hard to understand . . . for sucha long time. . . ."

"Well, observe that you never hear that accusation in defense ofinnocence, but always in defense of guilt. You never hear it said by a goodperson about those who fail to do him justice. But you always hear it said bya rotter about those who treat him as a rotter, those who don't feel anysympathy for the evil he's committed or for the pain he suffers as aconsequence. Well, it's true—that is what I do not feel. But those who feelit, feel nothing for any quality of human greatness, for any person or actionthat deserves admiration, approval, esteem. These are the things 7 feel.You'll find that it's one or the other. Those who grant sympathy to guilt,grant none to innocence.

Ask yourself which, of the two, are the unfeeling persons. And then you'llsee what motive is the opposite of charity."

"What?" she whispered.

"Justice, Cherryl."

Cherryl shuddered suddenly and dropped her head. "Oh God!" she moaned. "Ifyou knew what hell Jim has been giving me because I believed just what yousaid!" She raised her face in the sweep of another shudder, as if the thingsshe had tried to control had broken through; the look in her eyes was terror."Dagny," she whispered, "Dagny, I'm afraid of them ... of Jim and all theothers . . . not afraid of something they'll do . . . if it were that, Icould escape . . .

but afraid, as if there's no way out . . . afraid of what they are and . .. and that they exist."

Dagny came forward swiftly to sit on the arm of her chair and seize hershoulder in a steadying grasp. "Quiet, kid," she said. "You're wrong. Youmust never feel afraid of people in that way. You must never think that theirexistence is a reflection on yours—yet that's what you're thinking."

"Yes . . . Yes, I feel that there's no chance for me to exist, if they do. . . no chance, no room, no world I can cope with. ... I don't want tofeel it, I keep pushing it back, but it's coming closer and 1

know I have no place to run. ... I can't explain what it feels like, Ican't catch hold of it—and that's part of the terror, that you can't catchhold of anything—it's as if the whole world were suddenly destroyed, but notby an explosion—an explosion is something hard and solid—but destroyed by . .. by some horrible kind of softening . . .

as if nothing were solid, nothing held any shape at all, and you couldpoke your finger through stone walls and the stone would give, like jelly,and mountains would slither, and buildings would switch their shapes likeclouds—and that would be the end of the world, not fire and brimstone, butgoo. "

"Cherryl . . . Cherryl, you poor kid, there have been centuries ofphilosophers plotting to turn the world into just that—to destroy people'sminds by making them believe that that's what they're seeing.

But you don't have to accept it. You don't have to see through the eyes ofothers, hold onto yours, stand on your own judgment, you know that what is,is—say it aloud, like the holiest of prayers, and don't let anyone tell youotherwise."

"But . . . but nothing is, any more. Jim and his friends—they're not. Idon't know what I'm looking at, when I'm among them, I don't know what I'mhearing when they speak . . . it's not real, any of it, it's some ghastlysort of act that they're all going through . . . and I don't know whatthey're after. . . . Dagny! We've always been told that human beings havesuch a great power of knowledge, so much greater than animals, but I—I feelblinder than any animal right now, blinder and more helpless. An animal knowswho are its friends and who are its enemies, and when to defend itself. Itdoesn't expect a friend to step on it or to cut its throat. It doesn't expectto be told that love is blind, that plunder is achievement, that gangstersare statesmen and that it's great to break the spine of Hank Rearden!—oh God,what am I saying?"

"I know what you're saying."

"I mean, how am I to deal with people? I mean, if nothing held firm forthe length of one hour—we couldn't go on, could we? Well, I know that thingsare solid—but people? Dagny! They're nothing and anything, they're notbeings, they're only switches, just constant switches without any shape. ButI have to live among them. How am I to do it?"

"Cherryl, what you've been struggling with is the greatest problem inhistory, the one that has caused ail of human suffering. You've understoodmuch more than most people, who suffer and die, never knowing what killedthem. I'll help you to understand. It's a big subject and a hard battle—butfirst, above all, don't be afraid."

The look on Cherryl's face was an odd, wistful longing, as if, seeingDagny from a great distance, she were straining and failing to come closer,"I wish I could wish to fight," she said softly, "but I don't. I don't evenwant to win any longer. There's one change that I don't seem to have thestrength to make. You see, I had never expected anything like my marriage toJim, Then when it happened, I thought that life was much more wonderful thanI had expected. And now to get used to the idea that life and people are muchmore horrible than anything I had imagined and that my marriage was not aglorious miracle, but some unspeakable kind of evil which I'm still afraid tolearn fully—that is what I can't force myself to take. I can't get past it."She glanced up suddenly. "Dagny, how did you do it? How did you manage toremain unmangled?"

"By holding to just one rule."

"Which?"

"To place nothing—nothing—above the verdict of my own mind."

"You've taken some terrible beatings . . . maybe worse than I did . . .worse than any of us. . . . What held you through it?"

"The knowledge that my life is the highest of values, too high to give upwithout a fight."

She saw a look of astonishment, of incredulous recognition on Cherryl'sface, as if the girl were struggling to recapture some sensation across aspan of years. "Dagny"—her voice was a whisper—"that's . . . that's what Ifelt when I was a child . . . that's what I seem to remember most aboutmyself . . . that kind of feeling . . . and I never lost it, it's there, it'salways been there, but as I grew up, I thought it was something that I musthide. ... I never had any name for it, but just now, when you said it, it

struck me that that's what it was. . . . Dagny, to feel that way about yourown life—is that good?"

"Cherryl, listen to me carefully: that feeling—with everything which itrequires and implies—is the highest, noblest and only good on earth."

"The reason I ask is because I ... I wouldn't have dared to think that.Somehow, people always made me feel as if they thought it was a sin ... asif that were the thing in me which they resented and . . . and wanted todestroy."

"It's true. Some people do want to destroy it. And when you learn tounderstand their motive, you'll know the darkest, ugliest and only evil inthe world, but you'll be safely out of its reach."

Cherryl's smile was like a feeble flicker struggling to retain its holdupon a few drops of fuel, to catch them, to flare up. "It's the first time inmonths," she whispered, "that I've felt as if . . .as if there's still achance." She saw Dagny's eyes watching her with attentive concern, and sheadded, "I'll be all right . . . Let me get used to it—to you, to all thethings you said. I think I'll come to believe it ... to believe that it'sreal . . . and that Jim doesn't matter." She rose to her feet, as if tryingto retain the moment of assurance.

Prompted by a sudden, causeless certainty, Dagny said sharply, "Cherryl, Idon't want you to go home tonight."

"Oh no! I'm all right. I'm not afraid, that way. Not of going home."

"Didn't something happen there tonight?"

"No . . . not really . . . nothing worse than usual. It was just that Ibegan to see things a little more clearly, that was all . . .I'm all right.I have to think, think harder than I ever did before . . . and then I'lldecide what I must do. May I—" She hesitated.

"Yes? ' 1

"May I come back to talk to you again?""Of course."

"Thank you, I . . . I'm very grateful to you.""Will you promise me that you'll come back?""I promise."

Dagny saw her walking off down the hall toward the elevator, saw the slumpof her shoulders, then the effort that lifted them, saw the slender figurethat seemed to sway then marshal all of its strength to remain erect. Shelooked like a plant with a broken stem, still held together by a singlefiber, struggling to heal the breach, which one more gust of wind wouldfinish.

Through the open door of his study, James Taggart had seen Cherryl crossthe anteroom and walk out of the apartment. He had slammed his door andslumped down on the davenport, with patches of spilled champagne stillsoaking the cloth of his trousers, as if his own discomfort were a revengeupon his wife and upon a universe that would not provide him with thecelebration he had wanted.

After a while, he leaped to his feet, tore off his coat and threw itacross the room. He reached for a cigarette, but snapped it in half and flungit at a painting over the fireplace.

He noticed a vase of Venetian glass—a museum piece, centuries old, with anintricate system of blue and gold arteries twisting through its transparentbody. He seized it and flung it at the wall; it burst into a rain of glass asthin as a shattered light bulb.

He had bought that vase for the satisfaction of thinking of all theconnoisseurs who could not afford it. Now he experienced the satisfaction ofa revenge upon the centuries which had prized it—and the satisfaction ofthinking that there were millions of desperate families, any one of whomcould have lived for a year on the price of that vase.

He kicked off his shoes, and fell back on the davenport, letting hisstocking feet dangle in mid-air.

The sound of the doorbell startled him: it seemed to match his mood.

It was the kind of brusque, demanding, impatient snap of sound he wouldhave produced if he were now jabbing his finger at someone's doorbell.

He listened to the butler's steps, promising himself the pleasure ofrefusing admittance to whoever was seeking it. In a moment, he heard theknock at his door and the butler entered to announce, "Mrs.

Rearden to see you, sir."

"What? . . . Oh . . . Well! Have her come in!"

He swung his feet down to the floor, but made no other concession, andwaited with half a smile of alerted curiosity, choosing not to rise until amoment after Lillian had entered the room.

She wore a wine-colored dinner gown, an imitation of an Empire travelingsuit, with a miniature double-breasted jacket gripping her high waistlineover the long sweep of the skirt, and a small hat clinging to one ear, with afeather sweeping down to curl under her chin. She entered with a brusque,unrhythmical motion, the train of her dress and the feather of her hatswirling, then flapping against her legs and throat, like pennants signalingnervousness.

"Lillian, my dear, am I to be flattered, delighted or just plainflabbergasted?"

"Oh, don't make a fuss about it! I had to see you, and it had to beimmediately, that's all."

The impatient tone, the peremptory movement with which she sat down were aconfession of weakness: by the rules of their unwritten language, one did notassume a demanding manner unless one were seeking a favor and had no value—nothreat—to barter.

"Why didn't you stay at the Gonzales reception?" she asked, her casualsmile failing to hide the tone of irritation. "I dropped in on them afterdinner, just to catch hold of you—but they said you hadn't been feeling welland had gone home."

He crossed the room and picked up a cigarette, for the pleasure of paddingin his stocking feet past the formal elegance of her costume.

"I was bored," he answered.

"I can't stand them," she said, with a little shudder; he glanced at herin astonishment: the words sounded involuntary and sincere. "I can't standSenor Gonzales and that whore he's got himself for a wife.

It's disgusting that they've become so fashionable, they and theirparties. I don't feel like going anywhere any longer. It's not the same

style any more, not the same spirit. I haven't run into Balph Eubank formonths, or Dr. Pritchett, or any of the boys. And all those new faces thatlook like butcher's assistants! After all, our crowd were gentlemen."

"Yeah," he said reflectively. "Yeah, there's some funny kind ofdifference. It's like on the railroad, too: I could get along with GemWeatherby, he was civilized, but Cuffy Meigs—that's something else again,that's . . ."He stopped abruptly.

"It's perfectly preposterous," she said, in the tone of a challenge to thespace at large. "They can't get away with it."

She did not explain "who" or "with what." He knew what she meant. Througha moment of silence, they looked as if they were clinging to each other forreassurance.

In the next moment, he was thinking with pleasurable amusement thatLillian was beginning to show her age. The deep burgundy color of her gownwas unbecoming, it seemed to draw a purplish tinge out of her skin, a tingethat gathered, like twilight, in the small gullies of her face, softening her

flesh to a texture of tired slackness, changing her look of bright mockeryinto a look of stale malice.

He saw her studying him, smiling and saying crisply, with the smile aslicense for insult, "You are unwell, aren't you, Jim? You look like adisorganized stable boy."

He chuckled. "I can afford it."

"I know it, darling. You're one of the most powerful men in New YorkCity." She added, "It's a good joke on New York City.""It is."

"I concede that you're in a position to do anything. That's why I had tosee you." She added a small, grunt like sound of amusement, to dilute herstatement's frankness.

"Good," he said, his voice comfortable and noncommittal.

"I had to come here, because I thought it best, in this particular matter,not to be seen together in public.""That is always wise."

"I seem to remember having been useful to you in the past.""In the past—yes."

"I am sure that I can count on you."

"Of course—only isn't that an old-fashioned, unphilosophical remark? Howcan we ever be sure of anything?"

"Jim," she snapped suddenly, "you've got to help me!"

"My dear, I'm at your disposal, I'd do anything to help you," he answered,the rules of their language requiring that any open statement be answered bya blatant lie. Lillian was slipping, he thought—and he experienced thepleasure of dealing with an inadequate adversary.

She was neglecting, he noted, even the perfection of her particulartrademark: her grooming. A few strands were escaping from the drilled wavesof her hair—her nails, matching her gown, were the deep shade of coagulatedblood, which made it easy to notice the chipped polish at their tips—andagainst the broad, smooth, creamy expanse of her skin in the low, square cutof her gown, he observed the tiny glitter of a safety pin holding the strapof her slip.

"You've got to prevent it!" she said, in the belligerent tone of a pleadisguised as a command. "You've got to stop it!""Really? What?""My divorce."

"Oh . . . !" His features dropped into sudden earnestness."You know that he's going to divorce me, don't you?""I've heard some rumors about it."

"It's set for next month. And when I say set, that's just what I mean.

Oh, it's cost him plenty—but he's bought the judge, the clerks, thebailiffs, their backers, their backersl backers, a few legislators, half adozen administrators—he's bought the whole legal process, like a privatethoroughfare, and there's no single crossroad left for me to squeeze throughto stop it!"

"I see."

"You know, of course, what made him start divorce proceedings?""I can guess."

"And I did it as a favor to you!" Her voice was growing anxiously shrill."I told you about your sister in order to let you get that Gift Certificatefor your friends, which—"

"I swear I don't know who let it out!" he cried hastily. "Only a very fewat the top knew that you'd been our informer, and I'm sure nobody would daremention—"

"Oh, I'm sure nobody did. He'd have the brains to guess it, wouldn't he?""Yes, I suppose so. Well, then you knew that you were taking a chance."

"I didn't think he'd go that far. I didn't think he'd ever divorce me.I didn't-"

He chuckled suddenly, with a glance of astonishing perceptiveness."You didn't think that guilt is a rope that wears thin, did you, Lillian?"She looked at him, startled, then answered stonily, "I don't think itdoes."

"It does, my dear—for men such as your husband."

"I don't want him to divorce me!" It was a sudden scream. "I don't want tolet him go free! I won't permit it! I won't let the whole of my life be atotal failure!" She stopped abruptly, as if she had admitted too much.

He was chuckling softly, nodding his head with a slow movement that had anair of intelligence, almost of dignity, by signifying a completeunderstanding.

"I mean . . . after all, he's my husband," she said defensively."Yes, Lillian, yes, I know."

"Do you know what he's planning? He's going to get the decree and he'sgoing to cut me off without a penny—no settlement, no alimony, nothing! He'sgoing to have the last word. Don't you see? If he gets away with it, then . .. then the Gift Certificate was no victory for me at all!"

"Yes, my dear, I see."

"And besides . . . It's preposterous that I should have to think of it,but what am I going to live on? The little money I had of my own is worthnothing nowadays. It's mainly stock in factories of my father's time, thathave closed long ago. What am I going to do?"

"But, Lillian," he said softly, "I thought you had no concern for money orfor any material rewards."

"You don't understand! I'm not talking about money—I'm talking aboutpoverty! Real, stinking, hall-bedroom poverty! That's out of bounds for anycivilized person! I—I to have to worry about food and rent?"

He was watching her with a faint smile; for once, his soft, aging faceseemed tightened into a look of wisdom; he was discovering the pleasure offull perception—in a reality which he could permit himself to perceive.

"Jim, you've got to help me! My lawyer is powerless. I've spent the littleI had, on him and on his investigators, friends and fixers—but all they coulddo for me was find out that they can do nothing. My lawyer gave me his finalreport this afternoon. He told me bluntly that I haven't a chance. I don'tseem to know anyone who can help against a setup of this kind. I had countedon Bertram Scudder, but . . .

well, you know what happened to Bertram. And that, too, was because I hadtried to help you. You pulled yourself out of that one. Jim, you're the onlyperson who can pull me out now. You've got your gopher-hole pipe linestraight up to the top. You can reach the big boys. Slip a word to yourfriends to slip a word to their friends. One word from Wesley would do it.Have them order that divorce decree to be refused. Just have it be refused."

He shook his head slowly, almost compassionately, like a tiredprofessional at an overzealous amateur. "It can't be done, Lillian," he saidfirmly. "I'd like to do it—for the same reasons as yours—and I think you knowit. But whatever power I have is not enough in this case."

She was looking at him, her eyes dark with an odd, lifeless stillness;when she spoke, the motion of her lips was twisted by so evil a contempt thathe did not dare identify it beyond knowing that it embraced them both; shesaid, "I know that you'd like to do it."

He felt no desire to pretend; oddly, for the first time, for this onechance, truth seemed much more pleasurable—truth, for once, serving hisparticular kind of enjoyment. "I think you know that it can't be done," hesaid. "Nobody does favors nowadays, if there's nothing to gain in return. Andthe stakes are getting higher and higher. The gopher holes, as you called

them, are so complex, so twisted and intertwisted that everybody hassomething on everybody else, and nobody dares move because he can't tellwho'll crack which way or when. So he'll move only when he has to, when thestakes are life or death—and that's practically the only kind of stakes we'replaying for now. Well, what's your private life to any of those boys? Thatyou'd like to hold your husband—what's in it for them, one way or another?And my personal stock-in-trade—well, there's nothing I could offer them atthe moment in exchange for trying to blast a whole court clique out of ahighly profitable deal. Besides, right now, the top boys wouldn't do it atany price. They have to be mighty careful of your husband—he's the man who'ssafe from them right now—ever since that radio broadcast of my sister's.""You asked me to force her to speak on that broadcast!"

"I know, Lillian. We lost, both of us, that time. And we lose, both of us,now. "

"Yes," she said, with the same darkness of contempt in her eyes, "both ofus."

It was the contempt that pleased him; it was the strange, heedless,unfamiliar pleasure of knowing that this woman saw him as he was, yetremained held by his presence, remained and leaned back in her chair, as ifdeclaring her bondage.

"You're a wonderful person, Jim," she said. It had the sound of damnation.Yet it was a tribute, and she meant it as such, and his pleasure came fromthe knowledge that they were in a realm where damnation was value.

"You know," he said suddenly, "you're wrong about those butcher'sassistants, like Gonzales. They have their uses. Have you ever likedFrancisco d'Anconia?"

"I can't stand him."

"Well, do you know the real purpose of that cocktail-swilling occasionstaged by Senor Gonzales tonight? It was to celebrate the agreement tonationalize d'Anconia Copper in about a month."

She looked at him for a moment, the corners of her lips lifting slowlyinto a smile. "He was your friend, wasn't he?"

Her voice had a tone he had never earned before, the tone of an emotionwhich he had drawn from people only by fraud, but which now, for the firsttime, was granted with full awareness to the real, the actual nature of hisdeed: a tone of admiration.

Suddenly, he knew that this was the goal of his restless hours, this wasthe pleasure he had despaired of finding, this was the celebration he hadwanted.

"Let's have a drink, Lil." he said.

Pouring the liquor, he glanced at her across the room, as she laystretched limply in her chair. "Let him get his divorce," he said, "He won'thave the last word. They will. The butcher's assistants. Senor Gonzales andCuffy Meigs."

She did not answer. When he approached, she took the glass from him with asloppily indifferent sweep of her hand. She drank, not in the manner of asocial gesture, but like a lonely drinker in a saloon—for the physical sakeof the liquor.

He sat down on the arm of the davenport, improperly close to her, andsipped his drink, watching her face. After a while, he asked, "What does hethink of me?"

The question did not seem to astonish her. "He thinks you're a fool," sheanswered. "He thinks life's too short to have to notice your existence.""He'd notice it, if—" He stopped.

"—if you bashed him over the head with a club? I'm not too sure.He'd merely blame himself for not having moved out of the club's reach.Still, that would be your only chance."

She shifted her body, sliding lower in the armchair, stomach forward, asif relaxation were ugliness, as if she were granting him the kind of intimacythat required no poise and no respect.

"That was the first thing I noticed about him," she said, "when I met himfor the first time: that he was not afraid. He looked as if he felt certainthat there was nothing any of us could do to him—so certain that he didn'teven know the issue or the nature of what he felt."

"How long since you saw him last?"

"Three months. I haven't seen him since . . . since the Gift Certificate .

"I saw him at an industrial meeting two weeks ago. He still looks thatway—only more so. Now, he looks as if he knows it." He added, "You havefailed, Lillian."

She did not answer. She pushed her hat off with the back of her hand; itrolled down to the carpet, its feather curling like a question mark. "Iremember the first time I saw his mills," she said. "His mills!

You can't imagine what he felt about them. You wouldn't know the kind ofintellectual arrogance it takes to feel as if anything pertaining to him,anything he touched, were made sacred by the touch. His mills, his Metal, hismoney, his bed, his wife!" She glanced up at him, a small flicker piercingthe lethargic emptiness of her eyes. "He never noticed your existence. He didnotice mine. I'm still Mrs. Rearden—at least for another month."

"Yes . . ."he said, looking down at her with a sudden, new interest.

"Mrs. Rearden!" she chuckled. "You wouldn't know what that meant to him.No feudal lord ever felt or demanded such reverence for the title of hiswife—or held it as such a symbol of honor. Of his unbending, untouchable,inviolate, stainless honor!" She waved her hand in a vague motion, indicatingthe length of her sprawled body. "Caesar's wife!" she chuckled. "Do youremember what she was supposed to be?

No, you wouldn't. She was supposed to be above reproach,"

He was staring down at her with the heavy, blind stare of impotent hatred—a hatred of which she was the sudden symbol, not the object.

"He didn't like it when his Metal was thrown into common, public use, forany chance passer-by to make . . . did he?"

"No, he didn't."

His words were blurring a little, as if weighted with drops of the liquorhe had swallowed: "Don't tell me that you helped us to get that GiftCertificate as a favor to me and that you gained nothing. ... I know whyyou did it."

"You knew it at the time."

"Sure. That's why I like you, Lillian."

His eyes kept coming back to the low cut of her gown. It was not thesmooth skin that attracted his glance, not the exposed rise of her breasts,but the fraud of the safety pin beyond the edge.

"I'd like to see him beaten," he said. "I'd like to hear him scream withpain, just once."

"You won't, Jimmy."

"Why does he think he's better than the rest of us—he and that sister ofmine?"

She chuckled, He rose as if she had slapped him. He went to the bar andpoured himself another drink, not offering to refill her glass.

She was speaking into space, staring past him. "He did notice myexistence—even though I can't lay railroad tracks for him and erect bridgesto the glory of his Metal. I can't build his mills—but I can destroy them. Ican't produce his Metal—but I can take it away from him. I can't bring mendown to their knees in admiration—but I can bring them down to their knees."

"Shut up!" he screamed in terror, as if she were coming too close to thatfogbound alley which had to remain unseen.

She glanced up at his face. "You're such a coward, Jim."

"Why don't you get drunk?" he snapped, sticking his unfinished drink ather mouth, as if he wanted to strike her.

Her fingers half-closed limply about the glass, and she drank, spillingthe liquor down her chin, her breast and her gown.

"Oh hell, Lillian, you're a mess!" he said and, not troubling to reach forhis handkerchief, he stretched out his hand to wipe the liquor with the flatof his palm. His fingers slipped under the gown's neckline, closing over herbreast, his breath catching in a sudden gulp, like a hiccough. His eyelidswere drawing closed, but he caught a glimpse of her face leaning backunresistingly, her mouth swollen with revulsion.

When he reached for her mouth, her arms embraced him obediently and hermouth responded, but the response was just a pressure, not a kiss.

He raised his head to glance at her face. Her teeth were bared in a smile,but she was staring past him, as if mocking some invisible presence, hersmile lifeless, yet loud with malice, like the grin of a fleshless skull.

He jerked her closer, to stifle the sight and his own shudder. His handswere going through the automatic motions of intimacy—and she complied, but ina manner that made him feel as if the beats of her arteries under his touchwere snickering giggles. They were both performing an expected routine, aroutine invented by someone and imposed upon them, performing it in mockery,in hatred, in defiling parody on its inventors.

He felt a sightless, heedless fury, part-horror, part-pleasure—the horrorof committing an act he would never dare confess to anyone—

the pleasure of committing it in blasphemous defiance of those to whom hewould not dare confess it. He was himself!—the only conscious part of hisrage seemed to be screaming to him—he was, at last, himself!

They did not speak. They knew each other's motive. Only two words werepronounced between them. "Mrs. Rearden," he said.

They did not look at each other when he pushed her into his bedroom andonto his bed, falling against her body, as against a soft.

stuffed object. Their faces had a look of secrecy, the look of partners inguilt, the furtive, smutty look of children defiling someone's clean fence bychalking sneaky scratches intended as symbols of obscenity.

Afterward, it did not disappoint him that what he had possessed was aninanimate body without resistance or response. It was not a woman that he hadwanted to possess. It was not an act in celebration of life that he hadwanted to perform—but an act in celebration of the triumph of impotence.

Cherryl unlocked the door and slipped in quietly, almost surreptitiously,as if hoping not to be seen or to see the place which was her home. The senseof Dagny's presence—of Dagny's world—had supported her on her way back, butwhen she entered her own apartment the walls seemed to swallow her again intothe suffocation of a trap.

The apartment was silent; a wedge of light cut across the anteroom from adoor left half-open. She dragged herself mechanically in the direction of herroom. Then she stopped.

The open band of light was the door of Jim's study, and on the illuminatedstrip of its carpet she saw a woman's hat with a feather stirring faintly ina draft.

She took a step forward. The room was empty, she saw two glasses, one on atable, the other on the floor, and a woman's purse lying on the seat of anarmchair. She stood, in unexacting stupor, until she heard the muffled drawlof two voices behind the door of Jim's bedroom; she could not distinguish thewords, only the quality of the sounds: Jim's voice had a tone of irritation,the woman's—of contempt.

Then she found herself in her own room, fumbling frantically to lock herdoor. She had been flung here by the blind panic of escape, as if it were shewho had to hide, she who had to run from the ugliness of being seen in theact of seeing them—a panic made of revulsion, of pity, of embarrassment, ofthat mental chastity which recoils from confronting a man with theunanswerable proof of his evil.

She stood in the middle of her room, unable to grasp what action was nowpossible to her. Then her knees gave way, folding gently, she found herselfsitting on the floor and she stayed there, staring at the carpet, shaking.

It was neither anger nor jealousy nor indignation, but the blank horror ofdealing with the grotesquely senseless. It was the knowledge that neithertheir marriage nor his love for her nor his insistence on holding her nor hislove for that other woman nor this gratuitous adultery had any meaningwhatever, that there was no shred of sense in any of it and no use to gropefor explanations. She had always thought of evil as purposeful, as a means tosome end; what she was seeing now was evil for evil's sake.

She did not know how long she had sat there, when she heard their stepsand voices, then the sound of the front door closing. She got up, with nopurpose in mind, but impelled by some instinct from the past, as if acting ina vacuum where honesty was not relevant any longer, but knowing no other wayto act.

She met Jim in the anteroom. For a moment, they looked at each other as ifneither could believe the other's reality.

"When did you come back?" he snapped. "How long have you been home?""I don't know . . ."

He was looking at her face. "What's the matter with you?""Jim, I—" She struggled, gave up and waved her hand toward his bedroom."Jim, I know."

"What do you know?"

"You were there . . . with a woman."

His first action was to push her into his study and slam the door, as ifto hide them both, he could no longer say from whom. An unadmitted rage wasboiling in his mind, struggling between escape and explosion, and it blew upinto the sensation that this negligible little wife of his was depriving himof his triumph, that he would not surrender to her his new enjoyment.

"Sure!" he screamed. "So what? What are you going to do about it?"

She stared at him blankly.

"Sure! I was there with a woman! That's what I did, because that's what Ifelt like doing! Do you think you're going to scare me with your gasps, yourstares, your whimpering virtue?" He snapped his fingers.

"That for your opinion! I don't give a hoot in hell about your opinion!

Take it and like it!" It was her white, defenseless face that drove himon, lashing him into a state of pleasure, the pleasure of feeling as if hiswords were blows disfiguring a human face. "Do you think you're going to makeme hide? I'm sick of having to put on an act for your righteous satisfaction!Who the hell are you, you cheap little nobody?

I'll do as I please, and you'll keep your mouth shut and go through theright tricks in public, like everybody else, and stop demanding that I act inmy own home!—nobody is virtuous in his own home, the show is only forcompany!—but if you expect me to mean it—to mean it, you damn little fool!—you'd better grow up in a hurry!"

It was not her face that he was seeing, it was the face of the man at whomhe wanted and would never be able to throw his deed of this night—but she hadalways stood as the worshipper, the defender, the agent of that man in hiseyes, he had married her for it, so she could serve his purpose now, and hescreamed, "Do you know who she was, the woman I laid? It was—"

"No!" she cried. "Jim! I don't have to know it!"

"It was Mrs. Rearden! Mrs. Hank Rearden!"

She stepped back. He felt a brief flash of terror—because she was lookingat him as if she were seeing that which had to remain unadmitted to himself.She asked, in a dead voice that had the incongruous sound of common sense, "Isuppose you will now want us to get divorced?"

He burst out laughing. "You goddamn fool! You still mean it! You stillwant it big and pure' I wouldn't think of divorcing you—and don't goimagining that I'll let you divorce me! You think it's as important as that?Listen, you fool, there isn't a husband who doesn't sleep with other womenand there isn't a wife who doesn't know it, but they don't talk about it!I'll lay anybody I please, and you go and do the same, like all thosebitches, and keep your mouth shut!"

He saw the sudden, startling sight of a look of hard, unclouded,unfeeling, almost inhuman intelligence in her eyes. "Jim, if I were the kindwho did or would, you wouldn't have married me."

"No. I wouldn't have."

"Why did you marry me?"

He felt himself drawn as by a whirlpool, part in relief that the moment ofdanger was past, part in irresistible defiance of the same danger. "Becauseyou were a cheap, helpless, preposterous little guttersnipe, who'd never havea chance at anything to equal me! Because I thought you'd love me! I thoughtyou'd know that you had to love me!"

"As you are?"

"Without daring to ask what I am! Without reasons! Without putting me onthe spot always to live up to reason after reason after reason, like being onsome goddamn dress parade to the end of my days!"

"You loved me . . . because I was worthless?"

"Well, what did you think you were?"

"You loved me for being rotten?"

"What else did you have to offer? But you didn't have the humility toappreciate it. I wanted to be generous, I wanted to give you security—whatsecurity is there in being loved for one's virtues? The competition's wideopen, like a jungle market place, a better person will always come along tobeat you! But I—I was willing to love you for your flaws, for your faults andweaknesses, for your ignorance, your crudeness, your vulgarity—and that'ssafe, you'd have nothing to fear, nothing to hide, you could be yourself,your real, stinking, sinful, ugly self—everybody's self is a gutter—but youcould hold my love, with nothing demanded of you!"

"You wanted me to . . . accept your love ... as alms'"'"Did you imagine that you could earn it? Did you imagine that you coulddeserve to marry me, you poor little tramp? I used to buy the likes of youfor the price of a meal! I wanted you to know, with every step you took, withevery mouthful of caviar you swallowed, that you owed it all to me, that youhad nothing and were nothing and could never hope to equal, deserve orrepay!"

"I . . . tried ... to deserve it."

"Of what use would you be to me, if you had?"

"You didn't want me to?"

"Oh, you goddamn fool!"

"You didn't want me to improve? You didn't want me to rise? You thought merotten and you wanted me to stay rotten?"

"Of what use would you be to me, if you earned it all, and I had to workto hold you, and you could trade elsewhere if you chose?"

"You wanted it to be alms . . . for both of us and from both?

You wanted us to be two beggars chained to each other?"

"Yes, you goddamn evangelist! Yes, you goddamn hero worshipper!

Yes ! "

"You chose me because I was worthless?""Yes ! "

"You're lying, Jim."

His answer was only a startled glance of astonishment.

"Those girls that you used to buy for the price of a meal, they would havebeen glad to let their real selves become a gutter, they would have takenyour alms and never tried to rise, but you would not marry one of them. Youmarried me, because you knew that I did not accept the gutter, inside or out,that I was struggling to rise and would go on struggling—didn't you?"

"Yes!" he cried.

Then the headlight she had felt rushing upon her, hit its goal—and shescreamed in the bright explosion of the impact—she screamed in physicalterror, backing away from him.

"What's the matter with you?" he cried, shaking, not daring to see in hereyes the thing she had seen.

She moved her hands in groping gestures, half-waving it away, half tryingto grasp it; when she answered, her words did not quite name it, but theywere the only words she could find: "You . . . you're a killer . . . for thesake of killing . . ."

It was too close to the unnamed; shaking with terror, he swung out blindlyand struck her in the face.

She fell against the side of an armchair, her head striking the floor, butshe raised her head in a moment and looked up at him blankly, withoutastonishment, as if physical reality were merely taking the form she hadexpected. A single pear-shaped drop of blood went slithering slowly from thecorner of her mouth.

He stood motionless—and for a moment they looked at each other, as ifneither dared to move.

She moved first. She sprang to her feet—and ran. She ran out of the room,out of the apartment—he heard her running down the hall, tearing open theiron door of the emergency stairway, not waiting to ring for the elevator.

She ran down the stairs, opening doors on random landings, running throughthe twisting hallways of the building, then down the stairs again, until shefound herself in the lobby and ran to the street.

After a while, she saw that she was walking down a littered sidewalk in adark neighborhood, with an electric bulb glaring in the cave of a subwayentrance and a lighted billboard advertising soda crackers on the black roofof a laundry. She did not remember how she had come here. Her mind seemed towork in broken spurts, without connections.

She knew only that she had to escape and that escape was impossible.

She had to escape from Jim, she thought. Where?—she asked, looking aroundher with a glance like a cry of prayer. She would have seized upon a job in afive-and-ten, or in that laundry, or in any of the dismal shops she passed.But she would work, she thought, and the harder she worked, the moremalevolence she would draw from the people around her, and she would not knowwhen truth would be expected of her and when a lie, but the stricter herhonesty, the greater the fraud she would be asked to suffer at their hands.She had seen it before and had borne it, in the home of her family, in theshops of the slums, but she had thought that these were vicious exceptions,chance evils, to escape and forget. Now she knew that they were notexceptions, that theirs was the code accepted by the world, that it was acreed of living, known by all, but kept unnamed, leering at her from people'seyes in that sly, guilty look she had never been able to understand—and atthe root of the creed, hidden by silence, lying in wait for her in thecellars of the city and in the cellars of their souls, there was a thing withwhich one could not live.

Why are you doing it to me?—she cried soundlessly to the darkness aroundher. Because you're good—some enormous laughter seemed to be answering fromthe roof tops and from the sewers. Then I won't want to be good any longer—But you will—I don't have to—You will—

I can't bear it—You will.

She shuddered and walked faster—but ahead of her, in the foggy distance,she saw the calendar above the roofs of the city—it was long past midnightand the calendar said: August 6, but it seemed to her suddenly that she sawSeptember 2 written above the city in letters of blood—and she thought: Ifshe worked, if she struggled, if she rose., she would take a harder beatingwith each step of her climb, until, at the end, whatever she reached, be it acopper company or an unmortgaged cottage, she would see it seized by Jim onsome September 2

and she would see it vanish to pay for the parties where Jim made hisdeals with his friends.

Then I won't!—she screamed and whirled around and went running back alongthe street—but it seemed to her that in the black sky.

grinning at her from the steam of the laundry, there weaved an enormousfigure that would hold no shape, but its grin remained the same on itschanging faces, and its face was Jim's and her childhood preacher's and thewoman social worker's from the personnel department of the five-and-ten—andthe grin seemed to say to her: People like you will always stay honest,people like you will always struggle to rise, people like you will alwayswork, so we're safe and you have no choice.

She ran. When she looked around her once more, she was walking down aquiet street, past the glass doorways where lights were burning in thecarpeted lobbies of luxurious buildings. She noticed that she was limping,and saw that the heel of her pump was loose; she had broken it somewhere inher blank span of running.

From the sudden space of a broad intersection, she looked at the greatskyscrapers in the distance. They were vanishing quietly into a veil of fog,with the faint breath of a glow behind them, with a few lights like a smileof farewell. Once, they had been a promise, and from the midst of thestagnant sloth around her she had looked to them for proof that another kindof men existed. Now she knew that they were tombstones, slender obeliskssoaring in memory of the men who had been destroyed for having created them,they were the frozen shape of the silent cry that the reward of achievementwas martyrdom.

Somewhere in one of those vanishing towers, she thought, there was Dagny—but Dagny was a lonely victim, fighting a losing battle, to be destroyed andto sink into fog like the others.

There is no place to go, she thought and stumbled on—T can't stand still,nor move much longer—I can neither work nor rest—I can neither surrender norfight—but this . . . this is what they want of me, this is where they wantme—neither living nor dead, neither thinking nor insane, but just a chunk ofpulp that screams with fear, to be shaped by them as they please, they whohave no shape of their own.

She plunged into the darkness behind a corner, shrinking in dread from anyhuman figure. No, she thought, they're not evil, not all people . . . they'reonly their own first victims, but they all believe in Jim's creed, and Ican't deal with them, once I know it . . . and if I spoke to them, they wouldtry to grant me their good will, but I'd know what it is that they hold asthe good and I would see death staring out of their eyes.

The sidewalk had shrunk to a broken strip, and splashes of garbage ranover from the cans at the stoops of crumbling houses. Beyond the dusty glowof a saloon, she saw a lighted sign "Young Women's Rest Club" above a lockeddoor.

She knew the institutions of that kind and the women who ran them, thewomen who said that theirs was the job of helping sufferers.

If she went in—she thought, stumbling past—if she faced them and beggedthem for help, "What is your guilt?" they would ask her.

"Drink? Dope? Pregnancy? Shoplifting?" She would answer, "I have no guilt,I am innocent, but I'm—" "Sorry. We have no concern for the pain of theinnocent. "

She ran. She stopped, regaining her eyesight, on the corner of a long,wide street. The buildings and pavements merged with the sky—and two lines ofgreen lights hung in open space, going off into an endless distance, as ifstretching into other towns and oceans and foreign lands, to encircle theearth. The green glow had a look of serenity, like an inviting, unlimitedpath open to confident travel. Then the lights switched to red, droppingheavily lower, turning from sharp circles into foggy smears, into a warningof unlimited danger. She stood and watched a giant truck-go by, its enormouswheels crushing one more layer of shiny polish into the flattened cobbles ofthe street.

The lights went back to the green of safety—but she stood trembling,unable to move. That's how it works for the travel of one's body, shethought, but what have they done to the traffic of the soul? They have setthe signals in reverse—and the road is safe when the lights are the red ofevil—but when the lights are the green of virtue, promising that yours is theright-of-way, you venture forth and are ground by the wheels. All over theworld, she thought—those inverted lights go reaching into every land, they goon, encircling the earth. And the earth is littered with mangled cripples,who don't know what has hit them or why, who crawl as best they can on theircrushed limbs through their lightless days, with no answer save that pain isthe core of existence—

and the traffic cops of morality chortle and tell them that man, by hisnature, is unable to walk.

These were not words in her mind, these were the words which would havenamed, had she had the power to find them, what she knew only as a suddenfury that made her beat her fists in futile horror against the iron post ofthe traffic light beside her, against the hollow tube where the hoarse, rustychuckle of a relentless mechanism went grating on and on.

She could not smash it with her fists, she could not batter one by one allthe posts of the street stretching off beyond eyesight—as she could not smashthat creed from the souls of the men she would encounter, one by one. Shecould not deal with people any longer, she could not take the paths theytook—but what could she say to them, she who had no words to name the thingshe knew and no voice that people would hear? What could she tell them? Howcould she reach them all?

Where were the men who could have spoken?

These were not words in her mind, these were only the blows of: her fistsagainst metal—then she saw herself suddenly, battering her knuckles to bloodagainst an immovable post, and the sight made her shudder—and she stumbledaway. She went on, seeing nothing around her, feeling trapped in a maze withno exit.

No exit—her shreds of awareness were saying, beating it into the pavementsin the sound of her steps—no exit ... no refuge ... no signals ... noway to tell destruction from safety, or enemy from friend. . . . Like thatdog she had heard about, she thought . . .

somebody's dog in somebody's laboratory . . . the dog who got his signalsswitched on him, and saw no way to tell satisfaction from torture, saw foodchanged to beatings and beatings to food, saw his eyes and ears deceiving himand his judgment futile and his consciousness impotent in a shifting,

swimming, shapeless world—and gave up, refusing to eat at that price or tolive in a world of that kind. . . . No! —

was the only conscious word in her brain—no!—no!—no!—not your way, notyour world—even if this "no" is all that's to be left of mine!

It was in the darkest hour of the night, in an alley among wharfs andwarehouses that the social worker saw her. The social worker was a womanwhose gray face and gray coat blended with the walls of the district. She sawa young girl wearing a suit too smart and expensive for the neighborhood,with no hat, no purse, with a broken heel, disheveled hair and a bruise atthe corner of her mouth, a girl staggering blindly, not knowing sidewalksfrom pavements. The street was only a narrow crack between the sheer, blankwalls of storage structures, but a ray of light fell through a fog dank withthe odor of rotting water; a stone parapet ended the street on the edge of avast black hole merging river and sky.

The social worker approached her and asked severely, "Are you introuble?"—and saw one wary eye, the other hidden by a lock of hair, and theface of a wild creature who has forgotten the sound of human voices, butlistens as to a distant echo, with suspicion, yet almost with hope.

The social worker seized her arm. "It's a disgrace to come to such a state. . . if you society girls had something to do besides indulging your desiresand chasing pleasures, you wouldn't be wandering, drunk as a tramp, at thishour of the night ... if you stopped living for your own enjoyment, stoppedthinking of yourself and found some higher—"

Then the girl screamed—and the scream went beating against the blank wallsof the street as in a chamber of torture, an animal scream of terror. Shetore her arm loose and sprang back, then screamed in articulate sounds: "No!No! Not your kind of world!"

Then she ran, ran by the sudden propulsion of a burst of power, the powerof a creature running for its life, she ran straight down the street thatended at the river—and in a single streak of speed, with no break, no momentof doubt, with full consciousness of acting in self-preservation, she keptrunning till the parapet barred her way and, not stopping, went over intospace.

CHAPTER VTHEIR BROTHERS' KEEPERS

On the morning of September 2, a copper wire broke in California, betweentwo telephone poles by the track of the Pacific branch line of TaggartTranscontinental.

A slow, thin rain had been falling since midnight, and there had been nosunrise, only a gray light seeping through a soggy sky—and the brilliantraindrops hanging on the telephone wires had been the only sparks glitteringagainst the chalk of the clouds, the lead of the ocean and the steel of theoil derricks descending as lone bristles down a desolate hillside. The wireshad been worn by more rains and years than they had been intended to carry;one of them had kept sagging, through the hours of that morning, under thefragile load of raindrops; then its one last drop had grown on the wire'scurve and had hung like a crystal bead, gathering the weight of many seconds;the bead and the wire had given up together and, as soundless as the fall oftears, the wire had broken and fallen with the fall of the bead.

The men at the Division Headquarters of Taggart Transcontinental avoidedlooking at one another, when the break of the telephone line was discoveredand reported. They made statements painfully miscalculated to seem to referto the problem, yet to state nothing, none fooling the others. They knew thatcopper wire was a vanishing commodity, more precious than gold or honor; theyknew that the division storekeeper had sold their stock of wire weeks ago, tounknown dealers who came by night and were not businessmen in the daytime,but only men who had friends in Sacramento and in Washington—just as thestorekeeper, recently appointed to the division, had a friend in New York,named Cuffy Meigs, about whom one asked no questions. They knew that the manwho would now assume the responsibility of ordering repairs and initiatingthe action which would lead to the discovery that the repairs could not bemade, would incur retaliation from unknown enemies, that his fellow workerswould become mysteriously silent and would not testify to help him, that hewould prove nothing, and if he attempted to do his job, it would not be hisany longer. They did not know what was safe or dangerous these days, when theguilty were not punished, but the accusers were; and, like animals, they knewthat immobility was the only protection when in doubt and in danger. Theyremained immobile; they spoke about the appropriate procedure of sendingreports to the appropriate authorities on the appropriate dates.

A young roadmaster walked out of the room and out of the headquartersbuilding to the safety of a telephone booth in a drugstore and, at his ownexpense, ignoring the continent and the tiers of appropriate executivesbetween, he telephoned Dagny Taggart in New York.

She received the call in her brother's office, interrupting an emergencyconference. The young roadmaster told her only that the telephone line wasbroken and that there was no wire to repair it; he said nothing else and hedid not explain why he had found it necessary to call her in person. She didnot question him; she understood. "Thank you," was all that she answered.

An emergency file in her office kept a record of all the crucial materialsstill on hand, on every division of Taggart Transcontinental.

Like the file of a bankrupt, it kept registering losses, while the rareadditions of new supplies seemed like the malicious chuckles of sometormentor throwing crumbs at a starving continent. She looked through thefile, closed it, sighed and said, "Montana, Eddie. Phone the Montana Line toship half their stock of wire to California. Montana might be able to lastwithout it—for another week." And as Eddie Willers was about to protest, sheadded, "Oil, Eddie. California is one of the last producers of oil left in

the country. We don't dare lose the Pacific Line." Then she went back to theconference in her brother's office.

"Copper wire?" said James Taggart, with an odd glance that went from herface to the city beyond the window. "In a very short while, we won't have anytrouble about copper."

"Why?" she asked, but he did not answer. There was nothing special to seebeyond the window, only the clear sky of a sunny day, the quiet light ofearly afternoon on the roofs of the city and, above them, the page of thecalendar, saying: September 2.

She did not know why he had insisted on holding this conference in his ownoffice, why he had insisted on speaking to her alone, which he had alwaystried to avoid, or why he kept glancing at his wrist watch.

"Things are, it seems to me, going wrong," he said. "Something has to bedone. There appears to exist a state of dislocation and confusion tendingtoward an uncoordinated, unbalanced policy. What I mean is, there's atremendous national demand for transportation, yet we're losing money. Itseems to me—"

She sat looking at the ancestral map of Taggart Transcontinental on thewall of his office, at the red arteries winding across a yellowed continent.There had been a time when the railroad was called the blood system of thenation, and the stream of trains had been like a living circuit of blood,bringing growth and wealth to every patch of wilderness it touched. Now. itwas still like a stream of blood, but like the one-way stream that runs froma wound, draining the last of a body's sustenance and life. One-way traffic-she thought indifferently—consumers' traffic.

There was Train Number 193, she thought. Six weeks ago, Train Number 193had been sent with a load of steel, not to Faulkton, Nebraska, where theSpencer Machine Tool Company, the best machine tool concern still inexistence, had been idle for two weeks, waiting for the shipment—but to SandCreek, Illinois, where Confederated Machines had been wallowing in debt forover a year, producing unreliable goods at unpredictable times. The steel hadbeen allocated by a directive which explained that the Spencer Machine ToolCompany was a rich concern, able to wait, while Confederated Machines wasbankrupt and could not be allowed to collapse, being the sole source oflivelihood of the community of Sand Creek, Illinois. The Spencer Machine ToolCompany had closed a month ago. Confederated Machines had closed two weekslater.

The people of Sand Creek, Illinois, had been placed on national relief,but no food could be found for them in the empty granaries of the nation atthe frantic call of the moment—so the seed grain of the farmers of Nebraskahad been seized by order of the Unification Board—and Train Number 194 hadcarried the unplanted harvest and the future of the people of Nebraska to beconsumed by the people of Illinois. "In this enlightened age," Eugene Lawsonhad said in a radio broadcast, "we have come, at last, to realize that eachone of us is his brother's keeper."

"In a precarious period of emergency, like the present," James Taggart wassaying, while she looked at the map, "it is dangerous to find ourselvesforced to miss pay days and accumulate wage arrears on some of our divisions,a temporary condition, of course, but—"

She chuckled. "The Railroad Unification Plan isn't working, is it, Jim?"

"I beg your pardon?"

"You're to receive a big cut of the Atlantic Southern's gross income, outof the common pool at the end of the year—only there won't be any grossincome left for the pool to seize, will there?"

"That's not true! It's just that the bankers are sabotaging the Plan.

Those bastards—who used to give us loans in the old days, with no securityat all except our own railroad—now refuse to let me have a few measly

hundred-thousands, on short term, just to take care of a few payrolls, when Ihave the entire plant of all the railroads of the country to offer them assecurity for my loan!"She chuckled.

"We couldn't help it!" he cried. "It's not the fault of the Plan that somepeople refuse to carry their fair share of our burdens!"

"Jim, was this all you wanted to tell me? If it is, I'll go. I have workto do."

His eyes shot to his wrist watch. "No, no, that's not all! It's mosturgent that we discuss the situation and arrive at some decision, which—"

She listened blankly to the next stream of generalities, wondering abouthis motive. He was marking time, yet he wasn't, not fully; she felt certainthat he was holding her here for some specific purpose and, simultaneously,that he was holding her for the mere sake of her presence.

It was some new trait in him, which she had begun to notice ever sinceCherryl's death. He had come running to her, rushing, unannounced, into herapartment on the evening of the day when Cherryl's body had been found andthe story of her suicide had filled the newspapers, given by some socialworker who had witnessed it; "an. inexplicable suicide," the newspapers hadcalled it, unable to discover any motive. "It wasn't my fault!" he hadscreamed to her, as if she were the only judge whom he had to placate. "I'mnot to blame for it! I'm not to blame!" He had been shaking with terror—yetshe had caught a few glances thrown shrewdly at her face, which had seemed,inconceivably, to convey a touch of triumph. "Get out of here, Jim," was allshe had said to him.

He had never spoken to her again about Cherry], but he had started comingto her office more often than usual, he had stopped her in the halls forsnatches of pointless discussions—and such moments had grown into a sum thatgave her an incomprehensible sensation: as if, while clinging to her forsupport and protection against some nameless terror, his arms were sliding toembrace her and to plunge a knife into her back.

"I am eager to know your views," he was saying insistently, as she lookedaway. "It is most urgent that we discuss the situation and . . .

and you haven't said anything." She did not turn. "It's not as if therewere no money to be had out of the railroad business, but—"

She glanced at him sharply; his eyes scurried away.

"What I mean is, some constructive policy has to be devised," he droned onhastily. "Something has to be done . . . by somebody. In times of emergency—"

She knew what thought he had scurried to avoid, what hint he had givenher, yet did not want her to acknowledge or discuss. She knew that no trainschedules could be maintained any longer, no promises kept, no contractsobserved, that regular trains were cancelled at a moment's notice andtransformed into emergency specials sent by unexplained orders to unexpecteddestinations—and that the orders came from Cuffy Meigs, sole judge ofemergencies and of the public welfare.

She knew that factories were closing, some with their machinery stilledfor lack of supplies that had not been received, others with their warehousesfull of goods that could not be delivered. She knew that the old industries—the giants who had built their power by a purposeful course projected over aspan of time—were left to exist at the whim of the moment, a moment theycould not foresee or control. She knew that the best among them, those of thelongest range and most complex function, had long since gone—and those stillstruggling to produce, struggling savagely to preserve the code of an agewhen production had been possible, were now inserting into their contracts aline shameful to a descendant of Nat Taggart: "Transportation permitting."

And yet there were men—and she knew it—who were able to obtaintransportation whenever they wished, as by a mystic secret, as by the graceof some power which one was not to question or explain.

They were the men whose dealings with Cuffy Meigs were regarded by peopleas that unknowable of mystic creeds which smites the observer for the sin oflooking, so people kept their eyes closed, dreading, not ignorance, butknowledge. She knew that deals were made whereby those men sold a commodityknown as "transportation pull"—a term which all understood, but none woulddare define. She knew that these were the men of the emergency specials, themen who could cancel her scheduled trains and send them to any random spot ofthe continent which they chose to strike with their voodoo stamp, the stampsuperseding contract, property, justice, reason and lives, the stamp statingthat "the public welfare" required the immediate salvation of that spot.These were the men who sent trains to the relief of the Smather Brothers andtheir grapefruit in Arizona—to the relief of a factory in Florida engaged inthe production of pin-ball machines—

to the relief of a horse farm in Kentucky—to the relief of Orren Boyle'sAssociated Steel.

These were the men who made deals with desperate industrialists to providetransportation for the goods stalled in their warehouses—or, failing toobtain the percentage demanded, made deals to purchase the goods, when thefactory closed, at the bankruptcy sale, at ten cents on the dollar, and tospeed the goods away in freight cars suddenly available, away to marketswhere dealers of the same kind were ready for the kill. These were the menwho hovered over factories, waiting for the last breath of a furnace, topounce upon the equipment—and over desolate sidings, to pounce upon thefreight cars of undelivered goods—

these were a new biological species, the hit-and-run businessmen, who didnot stay in any line of business longer than the span of one deal, who had nopayrolls to meet, no overhead to carry, no real estate to own, no equipmentto build, whose only asset and sole investment consisted of an item known as"friendship." These were the men whom official speeches described as "theprogressive businessmen of our dynamic age," but whom people called "the pullpeddlers"—the species included many breeds, those of "transportation pull,"and of "steel pull" and "oil pull'l and "wage-raise pull" and "suspendedsentence pull"—men who were dynamic, who kept darting all over the countrywhile no one else could move, men who were active and mindless, active, notlike animals, but like that which breeds, feeds and moves upon the stillnessof a corpse.

She knew that there was money to be had out of the railroad business andshe knew who was now obtaining it Cuffy Meigs was selling trains as he wasselling the last of the railroad's supplies, whenever he could rig a setupwhich would not let it be discovered or proved—

selling rail to roads in Guatemala or to trolley companies in Canada,selling wire to manufacturers of juke boxes, selling crossties for fuel inresort hotels.

Did it matter—she thought, looking at the map—which part of the corpse hadbeen consumed by which type of maggot, by those who gorged themselves or bythose who gave the food to other maggots? So long as living flesh was prey tobe devoured, did it matter whose stomachs it had gone to fill? There was noway to tell which devastation had been accomplished by the humanitarians andwhich by undisguised gangsters. There was no way to tell which acts ofplunder had been prompted by the charity-lust of the Lawsons and which by thegluttony of Cuffy Meigs—no way to tell which communities had been immolatedto feed another community one week closer to starvation and which to provideyachts for the pull-peddlers. Did it matter? Both were alike in fact as theywere alike in spirit, both were in need and need was regarded as sole title

to property, both were acting in strictest accordance with the same code ofmorality. Both held the immolation of men as proper and both were achievingit. There wasn't even any way to tell who were the cannibals and who thevictims—the communities that accepted as their rightful due the confiscatedclothing or fuel of a town to the east of them, found, next week, theirgranaries confiscated to feed a town to the west—men had achieved the idealof the centuries, they were practicing it in unobstructed perfection, theywere serving need as their highest ruler, need as first claim upon them, needas their standard of value, as the coin of their realm, as more sacred thanright and life. Men had been pushed into a pit where, shouting that man ishis brother's keeper, each was devouring his neighbor and was being devouredby his neighbor's brother, each was proclaiming the righteousness of theunearned and wondering who was stripping the skin off his back, each wasdevouring himself, while screaming in terror that some unknowable evil wasdestroying the earth.

"What complaint do they now have to make?" she heard Hugh Akston's voicein her mind. "That the universe is irrational? Is it?"

She sat looking at the map, her glance dispassionately solemn, as if noemotion save respect were permissible when observing the awesome power oflogic. She was seeing—in the chaos of a perishing continent —the precise,mathematical execution of all the ideas men had held.

They had not wanted to know that this was what they wanted, they had notwanted to see that they had the power to wish, but not the power to fake—andthey had achieved their wish to the letter, to the last bloodstained comma ofit.

What were they thinking now, the champions of need and the lechers ofpity?—she wondered. What were they counting on? Those who had once simpered:"I don't want to destroy the rich, I only want to seize a little of theirsurplus to help the poor, just a little, they'll never miss it!"—then, later,had snapped: "The tycoons can stand being squeezed, they've amassed enough tolast them for three generations"—

then, later, had yelled: "Why should the people suffer while businessmenhave reserves to last a year?"—now were screaming: "Why should we starvewhile some people have reserves to last a week?" What were they counting on?—she wondered.

"You must do something!" cried James Taggart.

She whirled to face him. "I?"

"It's your job, it's your province, it's your duty!"

"What is?"

"To act. To do."

"To do-what?"

"How should I know? It's your special talent. You're the doer."She glanced at him: the statement was so oddly perceptive and soincongruously irrelevant. She rose to her feet."Is this all, Jim?""No! No! I want a discussion!""Go ahead."

"But you haven't said anything!""You haven't, either."

"But . . . What I mean is, there are practical problems to solve, which .. . For instance, what was that matter of our last allocation of new railvanishing from the storehouse in Pittsburgh?"

"Cuffy Meigs stole it and sold it."

"Can you prove it?" he snapped defensively.

"Have your friends left any means, methods, rules or agencies of proof?""Then don't talk about it, don't be theoretical, we've got to deal withfacts! We've got to deal with facts as they are today ... I mean, we've got

to be realistic and devise some practical means to protect our supplies underexisting conditions, not under unprovable assumptions, which—"

She chuckled. There was the form of the formless, she thought, there wasthe method of his consciousness: he wanted her to protect him from CuffyMeigs without acknowledging Meigs' existence, to fight it without admittingits reality, to defeat it without disturbing its game.

"What do you find so damn funny?" he snapped angrily.

"You know it"

"I don't know what's the matter with you! I don't know what's happened toyou ... in the last two months . . . ever since you came back. . . . You'venever been so uncooperative!"

"Why, Jim, I haven't argued with you in the last two months."

"That's what I mean!" He caught himself hastily, but not fast enough tomiss her smile. "I mean, I wanted to have a conference, I wanted to know yourview of the situation—"

"You know it."

"But you haven't said a word!"

"I said everything I had to say, three years ago. I told you where yourcourse would take you. It has."

"Now there you go again! What's the use of theorizing? We're here, we'renot back three years ago. We've got to deal with the present, not the past.Maybe things would have been different, if we had followed your opinion,maybe, but the fact is that we didn't—and we've got to deal with facts. We'vegot to take reality as it is now, today!"

"Well, take it."

"I beg your pardon?"

"Take your reality. I'll merely take your orders.""That's unfair! I'm asking for your opinion—"

"You're asking for reassurance, Jim. You're not going to get it.""I beg your pardon?"

"I'm not going to help you pretend—by arguing with you—that the realityyou're talking about is not what it is, that there's still a way to make itwork and to save your neck. There isn't."

"Well . . ." There was no explosion, no anger—only the feebly uncertainvoice of a man on the verge of abdication. "Well . . . what would you want meto do?"

"Give up." He looked at her blankly. "Give up—all of you, you and yourWashington friends and your looting planners and the whole of your cannibalphilosophy. Give up and get out of the way and let those of us who can, startfrom scratch out of the ruins."

"No!" The explosion came, oddly, now; it was the scream of a man who woulddie rather than betray his idea, and it came from a man who had spent hislife evading the existence of ideas, acting with the expediency of acriminal. She wondered whether she had ever understood the essence ofcriminals. She wondered about the nature of the loyalty to the idea ofdenying ideas.

"No!" he cried, his voice lower, hoarser and more normal, sinking from thetone of a zealot to the tone of an overbearing executive."That's impossible! That's out of the question!""Who said so?"

"Never mind! It's so! Why do you always think of the impractical?

Why don't you accept reality as it is and do something about it?

You're the realist, you're the doer, the mover, the producer, the NatTaggart, you're the person who's able to achieve any goal she chooses!

You could save us now, you could find a way to make things work—if youwanted to!"

She burst out laughing.

There, she thought, was the ultimate goal of all that loose academicprattle which businessmen had ignored for years, the goal of all the slipshoddefinitions, the sloppy generalities, the soupy abstractions, all claimingthat obedience to objective reality is the same as obedience to the State,that there is no difference between a law of nature and a bureaucrat'sdirective, that a hungry man is not free, that man must be released from thetyranny of food, shelter and clothing—all of it, for years, that the daymight come when Nat Taggart, the realist, would be asked to consider the willof Cuffy Meigs as a fact of nature, irrevocable and absolute like steel,rails and gravitation, to accept the Meigs made world as an objective,unchangeable reality—then to continue producing abundance in that world.There was the goal of all those con men of library and classroom, who soldtheir revelations as reason, their "instincts" as science, their cravings asknowledge, the goal of all the savages of the non-objective, the non-absolute, the relative, the tentative, the probable—the savages who, seeing afarmer gather a harvest, can consider it only as a mystic phenomenon unboundby the law of causality and created by the farmer's omnipotent whim, who thenproceed to seize the farmer, to chain him, to deprive him of tools, of seeds,of water, of soil, to push him out on a barren rock and to command: "Now growa harvest and feed us!"

No—she thought, expecting Jim to ask it—it would be useless to try toexplain what she was laughing at, he would not be able to understand it.

But he did not ask it. Instead, she saw him slumping and heard him say—terrifyingly, because his words were so irrelevant, if he did not understand,and so monstrous, if he did, "Dagny, I'm your brother . . ."

She drew herself up, her muscles growing rigid, as if she were about toface a killer's gun.

"Dagny"—his voice was the soft, nasal, monotonous whine of a beggar—"Iwant to be president of a railroad. I want it. Why can't I have my wish asyou always have yours? Why shouldn't I be given the fulfillment of my desiresas you always fulfill any desire of your own? Why should you be happy while Isuffer? Oh yes, the world is yours, you're the one who has the brains to runit. Then why do you permit suffering in your world? You proclaim the pursuitof happiness, but you doom me to frustration. Don't I have the right todemand any form of happiness I choose? Isn't that a debt which you owe me? AmI not your brother?"

His glance was like a prowler's flashlight searching her face for a shredof pity. It found nothing but a look of revulsion.

"It's your sin if I suffer! It's your moral failure! I'm your brother,therefore I'm your responsibility, but you've failed to supply my wants,therefore you're guilty! All of mankind's moral leaders have said so forcenturies—who are you to say otherwise? You're so proud of yourself, youthink that you're pure and good—but you can't be good, so long as I'mwretched. My misery is the measure of your sin. My contentment is the measureof your virtue. I want this kind of world, today's world, it gives me myshare of authority, it allows me to feel important-make it work for me!—dosomething!—how do I know what?—it's your problem and your duty! You have theprivilege of strength, but I—I have the right of weakness! That's a moralabsolute!

Don't you know it? Don't you? Don't you?"

His glance was now like the hands of a man hanging over an abyss, gropingfrantically for the slightest fissure of doubt, but slipping on the clean,polished rock of her face.

"You bastard," she said evenly, without emotion, since the words were notaddressed to anything human.

It seemed to her that she saw him fall into the abyss—even though therewas nothing to see in his face except the look of a con man whose trick hasnot worked.

There was no reason to feel more revulsion than usual, she thought; he hadmerely uttered the things which were preached, heard and accepted everywhere;but this creed was usually expounded in the third person, and Jim had had theopen effrontery to expound it in the first.

She wondered whether people accepted the doctrine of sacrifice providedits recipients did not identify the nature of their own claims and actions.

She turned to leave.

"No! No! Wait!" he cried, leaping to his feet, with a glance at his wristwatch. "It's time now! There's a particular news broadcast that I want you tohear!"

She stopped, held by curiosity.

He pressed the switch of the radio, watching her face openly, intently,almost insolently. His eyes had a look of fear and of oddly lecherousanticipation.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" the voice of the radio speaker leaped forthabruptly; it had a tone of panic. "News of a shocking development has justreached us from Santiago, Chile!"

She saw the jerk of Taggart's head and a sudden anxiety in his bewilderedfrown, as if something about the words and voice were not what he hadexpected.

"A special session of the legislature of the People's State of Chile hadbeen called for ten o'clock this morning, to pass an act of utmost importanceto the people of Chile, Argentina and other South American People's States.In line with the enlightened policy of Senior Ramirez, the new Head of theChilean State—who came to power on the moral slogan that man is his brother'skeeper—the legislature was to nationalize the Chilean properties of d'AnconiaCopper, thus opening the way for the People's State of Argentina tonationalize the rest of the d'Anconia properties the world over. This,however, was known only to a very few of the top-level leaders of bothnations. The measure had been kept secret in order to avoid debate andreactionary opposition.

The seizure of the multi-billion dollar d'Anconia Copper was to come as amunificent surprise to the country.

"On the stroke of ten, in the exact moment when the chairman's gavelstruck the rostrum, opening the session—almost as if the gavel's blow had setit off—the sound of a tremendous explosion rocked the hall, shattering theglass of its windows. It came from the harbor, a few streets away—and whenthe legislators rushed to the windows, they saw a long column of flame whereonce there had risen the familiar silhouettes of the ore docks of d'AnconiaCopper. The ore docks had been blown to bits.

"The chairman averted panic and called the session to order. The act ofnationalization was read to the assembly, to the sound of fire alarm sirensand distant cries. It was a gray morning, dark with rain clouds, theexplosion had broken an electric transmitter—so that the assembly voted onthe measure by the light of candles, while the red glow of the fire keptsweeping over the great vaulted ceiling above their heads.

"But more terrible a shock came later, when the legislators called a hastyrecess to announce to the nation the good news that the people now ownedd'Anconia Copper. While they were voting, word had come from the closest andfarthest points of the globe that there was no d'Anconia Copper left onearth. Ladies and gentlemen, not anywhere.

In that same instant, on the stroke of ten, by an infernal marvel ofsynchronization, every property of d'Anconia Copper on the face of the globe,

from Chile to Siam to Spain to Pottsville, Montana, had been blown up andswept away.

"The d'Anconia workers everywhere had been handed their last pay checks,in cash, at nine A.M., and by nine-thirty had been moved off the premises.The ore docks, the smelters, the laboratories, the office buildings weredemolished. Nothing was left of the d'Anconia ore ships which had been inport—and only lifeboats carrying the crews were left of those ships which hadbeen at sea. As to the d'Anconia mines, some were buried under tons ofblasted rock, while others were found not to be worth the price of blasting.An astounding number of these mines, as reports pouring in seem to indicate,had continued to be run, even though exhausted years ago.

"Among the thousands of d'Anconia employees, the police have found no onewith any knowledge of how this monstrous plot had been conceived, organizedand carried out. But the cream of the d'Anconia staff are not here anylonger. The most efficient of the executives, mineralogists, engineers,superintendents have vanished—all the men upon whom the People's State hadbeen counting to carry on the work and cushion the process of readjustment.The most able—correction: the most selfish—of the men are gone. Reports fromthe various banks indicate that there are no d'Anconia accounts leftanywhere; the money has been spent down to the last penny, "Ladies andgentlemen, the d'Anconia fortune—the greatest fortune on earth, the legendaryfortune of the centuries—has ceased to exist.

In place of the golden dawn of a new age, the People's States of Chile andArgentina are left with a pile of rubble and hordes of unemployed on theirhands.

"No clue has been found to the fate or the whereabouts of Senor Franciscod'Anconia. He has vanished, leaving nothing behind him, not even a message offarewell."

Thank you, my darling—thank you in the name of the last of us, even if youwill not hear it and will not care to hear. ... It was not a sentence, butthe silent emotion of a prayer in her mind, addressed to the laughing face ofa boy she had known at sixteen.

Then she noticed that she was clinging to the radio, as if the faintelectric beat within it still held a tie to the only living force on earth,which it had transmitted for a few brief moments and which now filled theroom where all else was dead.

As distant remnants of the explosion's wreckage, she noticed a sound thatcame from Jim, part-moan, part-scream, part-growl—then the sight of Jim'sshoulders shaking over a telephone and his distorted voice screaming, "But,Rodrigo, you said it was safe! Rodrigo—oh God!—do you know how much I'd sunkinto it?"—then the shriek of another phone on his desk, and his voicesnarling into another receiver, his hand still clutching the first, "Shutyour trap, Orren! What are you to do? What do I care, God damn you!"

There were people rushing into the office, the telephones were screamingand, alternating between pleas and curses, Jim kept yelling into onereceiver, "Get me Santiago! . . . Get Washington to get me Santiago!"

Distantly, as on the margin of her mind, she could see what sort of gamethe men behind the shrieking phones had played and lost. They seemed faraway, like tiny commas squirming on the white field under the lens of amicroscope. She wondered how they could ever expect to be taken seriouslywhen a Francisco d'Anconia was possible on earth.

She saw the glare of the explosion in every face she met through the restof the day—and in every face she passed in the darkness of the streets, thatevening. If Francisco had wanted a worthy funeral pyre for d'Anconia Copper,she thought, he -had succeeded. There it was, in the streets of New YorkCity, the only city on earth still able to understand it—in the faces ofpeople, in their whispers, the whispers crackling tensely like small tongues

of fire, the faces lighted by a look that was both solemn and frantic, theshadings of expressions appearing to sway and weave, as if cast by a distantflame, some frightened, some angry, most of them uneasy, uncertain,expectant, but all of them acknowledging a fact much beyond an industrialcatastrophe, all of them knowing what it meant, though none would name Usmeaning, all of them carrying a touch of laughter, a laughter of amusementand defiance, the bitter laughter of perishing victims who feel that they areavenged.

She saw it in the face of Hank Rearden, when she met him for dinner thatevening. As his tall, confident figure walked toward her—

the only figure that seemed at home in the costly setting of adistinguished restaurant—she saw the look of eagerness fighting the sternnessof his features, the look of a young boy still open to the enchantment of theunexpected. He did not speak of this day's event, but she knew that it wasthe only image in his mind.

They had been meeting whenever he came to the city, spending a brief, rareevening together—with their past still alive in their silent acknowledgment—with no future in their work and in their common struggle, but with theknowledge that they were allies gaining support from the fact of each other'sexistence.

He did not want to mention today's event, he did not want to speak ofFrancisco, but she noticed, as they sat at the table, that the strain of aresisted smile kept pulling at the hollows of his cheeks. She knew whom hemeant, when he said suddenly, his voice soft and low with the weight ofadmiration, "He did keep his oath, didn't he?"

"His oath?" she asked, startled, thinking of the inscription on the templeof Atlantis.

"He said to me, 'I swear—by the woman I love—that I am your friend,' Hewas."

"He is."

He shook his head. "I have no right to think of him. I have no right toaccept what he's done as an act in my defense. And yet . . ."He stopped.

"But it was, Hank. In defense of all of us—and of you, most of all."

He looked away, out at the city. They sat at the side of the room, with asheet of glass as an invisible protection against the sweep of space andstreets sixty floors below. The city seemed abnormally distant: it layflattened down to the pool of its lowest stories. A few blocks away, itstower merging into darkness, the calendar hung at the level of their faces,not as a small, disturbing rectangle, but as an enormous screen, eerily closeand large, flooded by the dead, white glow of light projected through anempty film, empty but for the letters: September 2.

"Rearden Steel is now working at capacity," he was saying indifferently."They've lifted the production quotas off my mills—for the next five minutes,I guess. I don't know how many of their own regulations they've suspended, Idon't think they know it, either, they don't bother keeping track of legalityany longer, I'm sure I'm a law-breaker on five or six counts, which nobodycould prove or disprove—all I know is that the gangster of the moment told meto go full steam ahead." He shrugged. "When another gangster kicks him outtomorrow, I'll probably be shut down, as penalty for illegal operation. Butaccording to the plan of the present split-second, they've begged me to keeppouring my Metal, in any amount and by any means I choose."

She noticed the occasional, surreptitious glances that people werethrowing in their direction. She had noticed it before, ever since herbroadcast, ever since the two of them had begun to appear in public together.Instead of the disgrace he had dreaded, there was an air of awed uncertaintyin people's manner—uncertainty of their own moral precepts, awe in the

presence of two persons who dared to be certain of being right. People werelooking at them with anxious curiosity, with envy, with respect, with thefear of offending an unknown, proudly rigorous standard, some almost with anair of apology that seemed to say: "Please forgive us for being married."There were some who had a look of angry malice, and a few who had a look ofadmiration.

"Dagny, " he asked suddenly, "do you suppose he's in New York?"

"No. I've called the Wayne-Falkland. They told me that the lease on hissuite had expired a month ago and he did not renew it."

"They're looking for him all over the world," he said, smiling.

"They'll never find him." The smile vanished. "Neither will I." His voiceslipped back to the flat, gray tone of duty: "Well, the mills are working,but I'm not. I'm doing nothing but running around the country like ascavenger, searching for illegal ways to purchase raw materials.

Hiding, sneaking, lying—just to get a few tons of ore or coal or copper.

They haven't lifted their regulations off my raw materials. They know thatI'm pouring more Metal than the quotas they give me could produce. They don'tcare." He added, "They think I do."

"Tired, Hank?"

"Bored to death."

There was a time, she thought, when his mind, his energy, hisinexhaustible resourcefulness had been given to the task of a producerdevising better ways to deal with nature; now, they were switched to the taskof a criminal outwitting men. She wondered how long a man could endure achange of that kind.

"It's becoming almost impossible to get iron ore," he said indifferently,then added, his voice suddenly alive, "Now it's going to be completelyimpossible to get copper." He was grinning.

She wondered how long a man could continue to work against himself, towork when his deepest desire was not to succeed, but to fail.

She understood the connection of his thoughts when he said, "I've nevertold you, but I've met Ragnar Danneskjold."

"He told me."

"What? Where did you ever—" He stopped. "Of course," he said, his voicetense and low. "He would be one of them. You would have met him. Dagny, whatare they like, those men who . . .No. Don't answer me." In a moment headded, "So I've met one of their agents."

"You've met two of them."

His response was a span of total stillness. "Of course," he said dully."I knew it ... I just wouldn't admit to myself that I knew ... He wastheir recruiting agent, wasn't he?""One of their earliest and best."

He chuckled; it was a sound of bitterness and longing. 'That night . . .when they got Ken Danagger ... I thought that they had not sent anyoneafter me. . . ."

The effort by which he made his face grow rigid, was almost like the slow,resisted turn of a key locking a sunlit room he could not permit himself toexamine. After a while, he said impassively, "Dagny, that new rail wediscussed last month—I don't think I'll be able to deliver it. They haven'tlifted their regulations off my output, they're still controlling my salesand disposing of my Metal as they please. But the bookkeeping is in such asnarl that I'm smuggling a few thousand tons into the black market everyweek. I think they know it. They're pretending not to. They don't want toantagonize me, right now. But, you see, I've been shipping every ton I couldsnatch, to some emergency customers of mine. Dagny, I was in Minnesota lastmonth. I've seen what's going on there. The country will starve, not nextyear, but this winter, unless a few of us act and act fast. There are no

grain reserves left anywhere. With Nebraska gone, Oklahoma wrecked, NorthDakota abandoned, Kansas barely subsisting—there isn't going to be any wheatthis winter, not for the city of New York nor for any Eastern city.

Minnesota is our last granary. They've had two bad years in succession,but they have a bumper crop this fall—and they have to be able to harvest it.Have you had a chance to take a look at the condition of the farm-equipmentindustry? They're not big enough, any of them, to keep a staff of efficientgangsters in Washington or to pay percentages to pull-peddlers. So theyhaven't been getting many allocations of materials. Two-thirds of them haveshut down and the rest are about to.

And farms are perishing all over the country—for lack of tools. You shouldhave seen those farmers in Minnesota. They've been spending more time fixingold tractors that can't be fixed than plowing their fields.

I don't know how they managed to survive till last spring. I don't knowhow they managed to plant their wheat. But they did. They did." There was alook of intensity on his face, as if he were contemplating a rare, forgottensight: a vision of men—and she knew what motive was still holding him to hisjob. "Dagny, they had to have tools for their harvest. I've been selling allthe Metal I could steal out of my own mills to the manufacturers of farmequipment. On credit. They've been sending the equipment to Minnesota as fastas they could put it out.

Selling it in the same way—illegally and on credit. But they will be paid,this fall, and so will I. Charity, hell! We're helping producers—

and what tenacious producers!—not lousy, mooching 'consumers.1

We're giving loans, not alms. We're supporting ability, not need. I'll bedamned if I'll stand by and let those men be destroyed while the pullpeddlers grow rich!"

He was looking at the image of a sight he had seen in Minnesota: thesilhouette of an abandoned factory, with the light of the sunset streaming,unopposed, through the holes of its windows and the cracks of its roof, withthe remnant of a sign: Ward Harvester Company.

"Oh, I know," he said. "We'll save them this winter, but the looters willdevour them next year. Still, we'll save them this winter. . . .

Well, that's why I won't be able to smuggle any rail for you. Not in theimmediate future—and there's nothing left to us but the immediate future. Idon't know what is the use of feeding a country, if it loses its railroads—but what is the use of railroads where there is no food?

What is the use, anyway?"

"It's all right, Hank, We'll last with such rail as we have, for—"

She stopped.

"For a month?"

"For the winter—I hope."

Cutting across their silence, a shrill voice reached them from anothertable, and they turned to look at a man who had the jittery manner of acornered gangster about to reach for his gun. "An act of anti-socialdestruction," he was snarling to a sullen companion, "at a time when there'ssuch a desperate shortage of copper! . . . We can't permit it!

We can't permit it to be true!"

Rearden turned abruptly to look off, at the city. "I'd give anything toknow where he is," he said, his voice low. "Just to know where he is, rightnow, at this moment."

"What would you do, if you knew it?"

He dropped his hand in a gesture of futility. "[ wouldn't approach him.The only homage I can still pay him is not to cry for forgiveness where noforgiveness is possible."

They remained silent. They listened to the voices around them, to thesplinters of panic trickling through the luxurious room.

She had not been aware that the same presence seemed to be an invisibleguest at every table, that the same subject kept breaking through theattempts at any other conversation. People sat in a manner, not quite ofcringing, but as if they found the room too large and too exposed—a room ofglass, blue velvet, aluminum and gentle lighting. They looked as if they hadcome to this room at the price of countless evasions, to let it help thempretend that theirs was still a civilized existence—but an act o£ primevalviolence had blasted the nature of their world into the open and they were nolonger able not to see.

"How could he? How could he?" a woman was demanding with petulant terror."He had no right to do it!"

"It was an accident," said a young man with a staccato voice and an odorof public payroll. "It was a chain of coincidences, as any statistical curveof probabilities can easily prove. It is unpatriotic to spread rumorsexaggerating the power of the people's enemies."

"Right and wrong is all very well for academic conversations," said awoman with a schoolroom voice and a barroom mouth, "but how can anybody takehis own ideas seriously enough to destroy a fortune when people need it?"

"f don't understand it," an old man was saying with quavering bitterness."After centuries of efforts to curb man's innate brutality, after centuriesof teaching, training and indoctrination with the gentle and the humane!"

A woman's bewildered voice rose uncertainly and trailed off: "I thought wewere living in an age of brotherhood . . ."

"I'm scared," a young girl was repeating, "I'm scared . . . oh, I don'tknow! . . .I'm just scared . . ."

"He couldn't have done it!" . . . "He did!" . . . "But why?" . . .

"I refuse to believe it!" . . . "It's not human!" . . . "But why?" . . .

"Just a worthless playboy!" . . . "But why?"

The muffled scream of a woman across the room and some half grasped signalon the edge of Dagny's vision, came simultaneously and made her whirl to lookat the city.

The calendar was run by a mechanism locked in a room behind the screen,unrolling the same film year after year, projecting the dates in steadyrotation, in changeless rhythm, never moving but on the stroke of midnight.The speed of Dagny's turn gave her time to see a phenomenon as unexpected asif a planet had reversed its orbit in the sky: she saw the words "September2" moving upward and vanishing past the edge of the screen.

Then, written across the enormous page, stopping time, as a last messageto the world and to the world's motor which was New York, she saw the linesof a sharp, intransigent handwriting: Brother, you asked for it!

Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia She did not know whichshock was greater: the sight of the message or the sound of Rearden'slaughter—Rearden, standing on his feet, in full sight and hearing of the roombehind him, laughing above their moans of panic, laughing in greeting, insalute, in acceptance of the gift he had tried to reject, in release, intriumph, in surrender.

On the evening of September 7, a copper wire broke in Montana, stoppingthe motor of a loading crane on a spur track of Taggart Transcontinental, atthe rim of the Stanford Copper Mine.

The mine had been working on three shifts, its days and nights blendinginto a single stretch of struggle to lose no minute, no drop of copper itcould squeeze from the shelves of a mountain into the nation's industrialdesert. The crane broke down at the task of loading a train; it stoppedabruptly and hung still against the evening sky, between a string of emptycars and piles of suddenly immovable ore.

The men of the railroad and of the mine stopped in dazed bewilderment:they found that in all the complexity of their equipment, among the drills,

the motors, the derricks, the delicate gauges, the ponderous floodlightsbeating down into the pits and ridges of a mountain—there was no wire to mendthe crane. They stopped, like men on an ocean liner propelled by ten-thousand-horsepower generators, but perishing for lack of a safety pin.

The station agent, a young man with a swift body and a brusque voice,stripped the wiring from the station building and set the crane in motionagain—and while the ore went clattering to fill the cars, the light ofcandles came trembling through the dusk from the windows of the station.

"Minnesota, Eddie," said Dagny grimly, closing the drawer of her specialfile. "Tell the Minnesota Division to ship half their stock of wire toMontana." "But good God, Dagny!—with the peak of the harvest rushapproaching—" "They'll hold through it—I think. We don't dare lose a singlesupplier of copper."

"But I have!" screamed James Taggart, when she reminded him once more. "Ihave obtained for you the top priority on copper wire, the first claim, theuppermost ration level, I've given you all the cards, certificates, documentsand requisitions—what else do you want?" "The copper wire." "I've done all Icould! Nobody can blame me!"

She did not argue. The afternoon newspaper was lying on his desk—

and she was staring at an item on the back page: An Emergency State Taxhad been passed in California for the relief of the state's unemployed, inthe amount of fifty per cent of any local corporation's gross income ahead ofother taxes; the California oil companies had gone out of business.

"Don't worry, Mr. Rearden," said an unctuous voice over a long distancetelephone line from Washington, "I just wanted to assure you that you willnot have to worry." "About what?" asked Rearden, baffled. "About thattemporary bit of confusion in California. We'll straighten it out in no time,it was an act of illegal insurrection, their state government had no right toimpose local taxes detrimental to national taxes, we'll negotiate anequitable arrangement immediately—

but in the meantime, if you have been disturbed by any unpatriotic rumorsabout the California oil companies, I just wanted to tell you that ReardenSteel has been placed in the top category of essential need, with first claimupon any oil available anywhere in the nation, very top category, Mr.Rearden—so I just wanted you to know that you won't have to worry about theproblem of fuel this winter!"

Rearden hung up the telephone receiver, with a frown of worry, not aboutthe problem of fuel and the end of the California oil fields-disasters of this kind had become habitual—but about the fact that theWashington planners found it necessary to placate him. This was new; hewondered what it meant. Through the years of his struggle, he had learnedthat an apparently causeless antagonism was not hard to deal with, but anapparently causeless solicitude was an ugly danger. The same wonder struckhim again, when, walking down an alley between the mill structures, he caughtsight of a slouching figure whose posture combined an air of insolence withan air of expecting to be swatted: it was his brother Philip.

Ever since he had moved to Philadelphia, Rearden had not visited hisformer home and had not heard a word from his family, whose bills he went onpaying. Then, inexplicably, twice in the last few weeks, he had caught Philipwandering through the mills for no apparent reason.

He had been unable to tell whether Philip was sneaking to avoid him orwaiting to catch his attention; it had looked like both. He had been unableto discover any clue to Philip's purpose, only some incomprehensiblesolicitude, of a kind Philip had never displayed before.

The first time, in answer to his startled "What are you doing here?"

—Philip had said vaguely, "Well, I know that you don't like me to come toyour office." "What do you want?" "Oh, nothing . . . but . . . well, Mother

is worried about you." "Mother can call me any time she wishes." Philip hadnot answered, but had proceeded to question him, in an unconvincingly casualmanner, about his work, his health, his business; the questions had kepthitting oddly beside the point, not questions about business, but more abouthis, Rearden's, feelings toward business. Rearden had cut him short and wavedhim away, but had been left with the small, nagging sense of an incident thatremained inexplicable.

The second time, Philip had said, as sole explanation, "We just want toknow how you feel." "Who's we?" "Why . . . Mother and I. These are difficulttimes and . . . well, Mother wants to know how you feel about it all." "Tellher that I don't." The words had seemed to hit Philip in some peculiarmanner, almost as if this were the one answer he dreaded. "Get out of here,"Rearden had ordered wearily, "and the next time you want to see me, make anappointment and come to my office. But don't come unless you have somethingto say. This is not a place where one discusses feelings, mine or anybodyelse's."

Philip had not called for an appointment—but now there he was again,slouching among the giant shapes of the furnaces, with an air of guilt andsnobbishness together, as if he were both snooping and slumming.

"But I do have something to say! I do!" he cried hastily, in answer to theangry frown on Rearden's face.

"Why didn't you come to my office?"

"You don't want me in your office."

"I don't want you here, either."

"But I'm only . . .I'm only trying to be considerate and not to take yourtime when you're so busy and . . . you are very busy, aren't you?""And?"

"And . . . well, I just wanted to catch you in a spare moment . . .to talk to you.""About what?"

"I . . . Well, I need a job."

He said it belligerently and drew back a little. Rearden stood looking athim blankly.

"Henry, I want a job. I mean, here, at the mills. I want you to give mesomething to do. I need a job, I need to earn my living.

I'm tired of alms." He was groping for something to say, his voice bothoffended and pleading, as if the necessity to justify the plea were an unfairimposition upon him. "I want a livelihood of my own, I'm not asking you forcharity, I'm asking you to give me a chance!"

"This is a factory, Philip, not a gambling joint,"

"Uh?"

"We don't take chances or give them."'I'm asking you to give me a job!""Why should I?""Because I need it!"

Rearden pointed to the red spurts of flame shooting from the black shapeof a furnace, shooting safely into space four hundred feet of steel-clay-and-steam-embodied thought above them. "I needed that furnace, Philip. "It wasn'tmy need that gave it to me."

Philip's face assumed a look of not having heard. "You're not officiallysupposed to hire anybody, bat that's just a technicality, if you'll put meon, my friends will okay it without any trouble and—" Something aboutRearden's eyes made him stop abruptly, then ask in an angrily impatientvoice, "Well, what's the matter? What have I said that's wrong?"

"What you haven't said."

"I beg your pardon?"

"What you're squirming to leave unmentioned."

"What?"

"That you'd be of no use to me whatever."

"Is that what you—" Philip started with automatic righteousness, butstopped and did not finish.

"Yes," said Rearden, smiling, "that's what I think of first."

Philip's eyes oozed away; when he spoke, his voice sounded as if it weredarting about at random, picking stray sentences: "Everybody is entitled to alivelihood . . . How am I going to get it, if nobody gives me my chance?"

"How did I get mine?"

"I wasn't born owning a steel plant.""Was I?"

"I can do anything you can—if you'll teach me.""Who taught me?"

"Why do you keep saying that? I'm not talking about you!""I am."

In a moment, Philip muttered, "What do you have to worry about?It's not your livelihood that's in question!"

Rearden pointed to the figures of men in the steaming rays of the furnace."Can you do what they're doing?""I don't see what you're—"

"What will happen if I put you there and you ruin a heat of steel for me?""What's more important, that your damn steel gets poured or that I eat?""How do you propose to eat if the steel doesn't get poured?"Philip's face assumed a look of reproach. "I'm not in a position to arguewith you right now, since you hold the upper hand.""Then don't argue.""Uh?"

"Keep your mouth shut and get out of here.""But I meant—" He stopped.

Rearden chuckled. "You meant that it's I who should keep my mouth shut,because I hold the upper hand, and should give in to you, because you hold nohand at all?"

"That's a peculiarly crude way of stating a moral principle.""But that's what your moral principle amounts to, doesn't it?""You can't discuss morality in materialistic terms."

"We're discussing a job in a steel plant—and, boy! is that a materialisticplace!"

Philip's 'body drew a shade tighter together and his eyes became a shademore glazed, as if in fear of the place around him, in resentment of itssight, in an effort not to concede its reality. He said, in the soft,stubborn whine of a voodoo incantation, "It's a moral imperative, universallyconceded in our day and age, that every man is entitled to a job." His voicerose: "I'm entitled to it!"

"You are? Go on, then, collect your claim."

"Uh?"

"Collect your job. Pick it off the bush where you think it grows.""I mean—"

"You mean that it doesn't? You mean that you need it, but can't create it?You mean that you're entitled to a job which I must create for you?""Yes ! "

"And if I don't?"

The silence went stretching through second after second. "I don'tunderstand you," said Philip; his voice had the angry bewilderment of a manwho recites the formulas of a well-tested role, but keeps getting the wrongcues in answer. "I don't understand why one can't talk to you any more. Idon't understand what sort of theory you're propounding and—"

"Oh yes, you do."

As if refusing to believe that the formulas could fail, Philip burst outwith: "Since when did you take to abstract philosophy? You're only abusinessman, you're not qualified to deal with questions of principle, youought to leave it to the experts who have conceded for centuries—"

"Cut it, Philip. What's the gimmick?"

"Gimmick?"

"Why the sudden ambition?"

"Well, at a time like this ..."

"Like what?"

"Well, every man has the right to have some means of support and . . . andnot be left to be tossed aside . . . When things are so uncertain, a man'sgot to have some security . . . some foothold ... I mean, at a time likethis, if anything happened to you, I'd have no—"

"What do you expect to happen to me?"

"Oh, I don't! I don't!" The cry was oddly, incomprehensibly genuine."I don't expect anything to happen] ... Do you?""Such as what?"

"How do I know? . . . But I've got nothing except the pittance you give meand . . . and you might change your mind any time.""I might."

"And I haven't any hold on you at all."

"Why did it take you that many years to realize it and start worrying?Why now?"

"Because . . . because you've changed. You . . . you used to have a senseof duty and moral responsibility, but . . . you're losing it.You're losing it, aren't you?"

Rearden stood studying him silently; there was something peculiar inPhilip's manner of sliding toward questions, as if his words were accidental,but the too casual, the faintly Insistent questions were the key to hispurpose.

"Well, I'll be glad to take the burden off your shoulders, if I'm a burdento you!" Philip snapped suddenly. "Just give me a job, and your consciencewon't have to bother you about me any longer!"

"It doesn't."

"That's what I mean! You don't care. You don't care what becomes of any ofus, do you?""Of whom?"

"Why . . . Mother and me and . . . and mankind in general. But I'm notgoing to appeal to your better self. I know that you're ready to ditch me ata moment's notice, so—"

"You're lying, Philip. That's not what you're worried about. If it were,you'd be angling for a chunk of cash, not for a job, not—"

"No! I want a job!" The cry was immediate and almost frantic. "Don't tryto buy me off with cash! I want a job!"

"Pull yourself together, you poor louse. Do you hear what you're saying?"

Philip spit out his answer with impotent hatred: "You can't talk to methat way!"

"Can you?"

"I only-"

"To buy you off? Why should I try to buy you off—instead of kicking youout, as I should have, years ago?"

"Well, after all, I'm your brother!""What is that supposed to mean?"

"One's supposed to have some sort of feeling for one's brother.""Do you?"

Philip's mouth swelled petulantly; he did not answer; he waited; Reardenlet him wait. Philip muttered, "You're supposed ... at least ... to havesome consideration for my feelings . . . but you haven't."

"Have you for mine?"

"Yours? Your feelings?" It was not malice in Philip's voice, but worse: itwas a genuine, indignant astonishment. "You haven't any feelings. You'venever felt anything at all. You've never suffered!"

It was as if a sum of years hit Rearden in the face, by means of asensation and a sight: the exact sensation of what he had felt in the cab ofthe first train's engine on the John Gait Line—and the sight of Philip'seyes, the pale, half-liquid eyes presenting the uttermost of humandegradation: an uncontested pain, and, with the obscene insolence of askeleton toward a living being, demanding that this pain be held as thehighest of values. You've never suffered, the eyes were saying to himaccusingly—while he was seeing the night in his office when his ore mineswere taken away from him—the moment when he had signed the Gift Certificatesurrendering Rearden Metal—the month of days inside a plane that searched forthe remains of Dagny's body. You've never suffered, the eyes were saying withself-righteous scorn—while he remembered the sensation of proud chastity withwhich he had fought through those moments, refusing to surrender to pain, asensation made of his love, of his loyalty, of his knowledge that joy is thegoal of existence, and joy is not to be stumbled upon, but to be achieved,and the act of treason is to let its vision drown in the swamp of themoment's torture. You've never suffered, the dead stare of the eyes wassaying, you've never felt anything, because only to suffer is to feel—there'sno such thing as joy, there's only pain and the absence of pain, only painand the zero, when one feels nothing—I suffer, I'm twisted by suffering, I'mmade of undiluted suffering, that's my purity, that's my virtue—and yours,you the untwisted one, you the uncomplaining, yours is to relieve me of mypain—cut your unsuffering body to patch up mine, cut your unfeeling soul tostop mine from feeling—and we'll achieve the ultimate ideal, the triumph overlife, the zero! He was seeing the nature of those who, for centuries, had notrecoiled from the preachers of annihilation—he was seeing the nature of theenemies he had been fighting all his life.

"Philip," he said, "get out of here." His voice was like a ray of sunlightin a morgue, it was the plain, dry, daily voice of a businessman, the soundof health, addressed to an enemy one could not honor by anger, nor even byhorror. "And don't ever try to enter these mills again, because there will beorders at every gate to throw you out, if you try it.'l

"Well, after all," said Philip, in the angry and cautious tone of atentative threat, "I could have my friends assign me to a job here and compelyou to accept it!"

Rearden had started to go, but he stopped and turned to look at hisbrother.

Philip's moment of grasping a sudden revelation was not accomplished bymeans of thought, but by means of that dark sensation which was his only modeof consciousness: he felt a sensation of terror, squeezing his throat,shivering down into his stomach—he was seeing the spread of the mills, withthe roving streamers of flame, with the ladles of molten metal sailingthrough space on delicate cables, with open pits the color of glowing coal,with cranes coming at his head, pounding past, holding tons of steel by theinvisible power of magnets—and he knew that he was afraid of this place,afraid to the death, that he dared not move without the protection andguidance of the man before him—

then he looked at the tall, straight figure standing casually still, thefigure with the unflinching eyes whose sight had cut through rock and flameto build this place—and then he knew how easily the man he was proposing to

compel could let a single bucket of metal tilt over a second ahead of itstime or let a single crane drop its load a foot short of its goal, and therewould be nothing left of him, of Philip the claimant—

and his only protection lay in the fact that his mind would think of suchactions, but the mind of Hank Rearden would not.

"But we'd better keep it on a friendly basis," said Philip.

"You'd better," said Rearden and walked away.

Men who worship pain—thought Rearden, staring at the image of the enemieshe had never been able to understand—they're men who worship pain. It seemedmonstrous, yet peculiarly devoid of importance.

He felt nothing. It was like trying to summon emotion toward inanimateobjects, toward refuse sliding down a mountainside to crush him. One couldflee from the slide or build retaining walls against it or be crushed —butone could not grant any anger, indignation or moral concern to the senselessmotions of the un-living; no, worse, he thought—the antiliving.

The same sense of detached unconcern remained with him while he sat in aPhiladelphia courtroom and watched men perform the motions which were togrant him his divorce. He watched them utter mechanical generalities, recitevague phrases of fraudulent evidence, play an intricate game of stretchingwords to convey no facts and no meaning. He had paid them to do it—he whomthe law permitted no other way to gain his freedom, no right to state thefacts and plead the truth—the law which delivered his fate, not to objectiverules objectively defined, but to the arbitrary mercy of a judge with awizened face and a look of empty cunning.

Lillian was not present in the courtroom; her attorney made gestures oncein a while, with the energy of letting water run through his fingers. Theyall knew the verdict in advance and they knew its reason; no other reason hadexisted for years, where no standards, save whim, had existed. They seemed toregard it as their rightful prerogative; they acted as if the purpose of theprocedure were not to try a case, but to give them jobs, as if their jobswere to recite the appropriate formulas with no responsibility to know whatthe formulas accomplished, as if a courtroom were the one place wherequestions of right and wrong were irrelevant and they, the men in charge ofdispensing justice, were safely wise enough to know that no justice existed.They acted like savages performing a ritual devised to set them free ofobjective reality.

But the ten years of his marriage had been real, he thought—and these werethe men who assumed the power to dispose of it, to decide whether he wouldhave a chance of contentment on earth or be condemned to torture for the restof his lifetime. He remembered the austerely pitiless respect he had felt forhis contract of marriage, for all his contracts and all his legalobligations—and he saw what sort of legality his scrupulous observance wasexpected to serve.

He noticed that the puppets of the courtroom had started by glancing athim in the sly, wise manner of fellow conspirators sharing a common guilt,mutually safe from moral condemnation. Then, when they observed that he wasthe only man in the room who looked steadily straight at anyone's face, hesaw resentment growing in their eyes. Incredulously, he realized what it wasthat had been expected of him: he, the victim, chained, bound, gagged andleft with no recourse save to bribery, had been expected to believe that thefarce he had purchased was a process of law, that the edicts enslaving himhad moral validity, that he was guilty of corrupting the integrity of theguardians of justice, and that the blame was his, not theirs. It was likeblaming the victim of a holdup for corrupting the integrity of the thug. Andyet—he thought —through all the generations of political extortion, it wasnot the looting bureaucrats who had taken the blame, but the chainedindustrialists, not the men who peddled legal favors, but the men who were

forced to buy them; and through all those generations of crusades againstcorruption, the remedy had always been, not the liberating of the victims,but the granting of wider powers for extortion to the extortionists. The onlyguilt of the victims, he thought, had been that they accepted it as guilt.

When he walked out of the courtroom into the chilly drizzle of a grayafternoon, he felt as if he had been divorced, not only from Lillian, butfrom the whole of the human society that supported the procedure he hadwitnessed.

The face of his attorney, an elderly man of the old-fashioned school, worean expression that made it look as if he longed to take a bath.

"Say, Hank," he asked as sole comment, "is there something the looters areanxious to get from you right now?" "Not that I know of. Why?"

"The thing went too smoothly. There were a few points at which I expectedpressure and hints for some extras, but the boys sailed past and took noadvantage of it. Looks to me as if orders had come from on high to treat yougently and let you have your way. Are they planning something new againstyour mills?" "Not that I know of," said Rearden —and was astonished to hearin his mind: Not that I care.

It was on the same afternoon, at the mills, that he saw the Wet Nursehurrying toward him—a gangling, coltish figure with a peculiar mixture ofbrusqueness, awkwardness and decisiveness.

"Mr. Rearden, I would like to speak to you." His voice was diffident, yetoddly firm.

"Go ahead."

"There's something I want to ask you." The boy's face was solemn and taut."I want you to know that I know you should refuse me, but I want to ask itjust the same . . . and . . . and if it's presumptuous, then just tell me togo to hell."

"Okay. Try it."

"Mr. Rearden, would you give me a job?" It was the effort to sound normalthat betrayed the days of struggle behind the question. "I want to quit whatI'm doing and go to work. I mean, real work—in steel making, like I thoughtI'd started to, once. I want to earn my keep. I'm tired of being a bedbug."

Rearden could not resist smiling and reminding him, in the tone of aquotation, "Now why use such words, Non-Absolute? If we don't use ugly words,we won't have any ugliness and—" But he saw the desperate earnestness of theboy's face and stopped, his smile vanishing.

"I mean it, Mr. Rearden. And I know what the word means and it's the rightword. I'm tired of being paid, with your money, to do nothing except make itimpossible for you to make any money at all. I know that anyone who workstoday is only a sucker for bastards like me, but . . .

well, God damn it, I'd rather be a sucker, if that's all there's left tobe! "

His voice had risen to a cry. "I beg your pardon, Mr. Rearden," he saidstiffly, looking away. In a moment, he went on in his woodenly unemotionaltone. "I want to get out of the Deputy-Director-of-Distribution racket. Idon't know that I'd be of much use to you, I've got a college diploma inmetallurgy, but that's not worth the paper it's printed on. But I think I'velearned a little about the work in the two years I've been here—and if youcould use me at all, as sweeper or scrap man or whatever you'd trust me with,I'd tell them where to put the deputy directorship and I'd go to work for youtomorrow, next week, this minute or whenever you say." He avoided looking atRearden, not in a manner of evasion, but as if he had no right to do it.

"Why were you afraid to ask me?" said Rearden gently.

The boy glanced at him with indignant astonishment, as if the answer wereself-evident. "Because after the way I started here and the way I acted and

what I'm deputy of, if I come asking you for favors, you ought to kick me inthe teeth!"

"You have learned a great deal in the two years you've been here."

"No, I—" He glanced at Rearden, understood, looked away and said woodenly,"Yeah ... if that's what you mean."

"Listen, kid, I'd give you a job this minute and I'd trust you with morethan a sweeper's job, if it were up to me. But have you forgotten theUnification Board? I'm not allowed to hire you and you're not allowed toquit. Sure, men are quitting all the time, and we're hiring others underphony names and fancy papers proving that they've worked here for years. Youknow it, and thanks for keeping your mouth shut. But do you think that if Ihired you that way, your friends in Washington would miss it?"

The boy shook his head slowly.

"Do you think that if you quit their service to become a sweeper, theywouldn't understand your reason?"The boy nodded."Would they let you go?"

The boy shook his head. After a moment, he said in a tone of forlornastonishment, "I hadn't thought of that at all, Mr. Rearden. I forgot them. Ikept thinking of whether you'd want me or not and that the only thing thatcounted was your decision."

"I know."

"And . . . it is the only thing that counts, in fact.""Yes, Non-Absolute, in fact."

The boy's mouth jerked suddenly into the brief, mirthless twist of asmile. "I guess I'm tied worse than any sucker . . ."

"Yes. There's nothing you can do now, except apply to the UnificationBoard for permission to change your job. I'll support your application, ifyou want to try—only I don't think they'll grant it. I don't think they'lllet you work for me."

"No. They won't."

"If you maneuver enough and lie enough, they might permit you to transferto a private job—with some other steel company."

"No! I don't want to go anywhere else! I don't want to leave this place!"He stood looking off at the invisible vapor of rain over the flame of thefurnaces. After a while, he said quietly, "I'd better stay put, I guess. I'dbetter go on being a deputy looter. Besides, if I left, God only knows whatsort of bastard they'd saddle you with in my place!"

He turned. "They're up to something, Mr. Rearden. I don't know what it is,but they're getting ready to spring something on you."

"What?"

"I don't know. But they've been watching every opening here, in the lastfew weeks, every desertion, and slipping their own gang in. A queer sort ofgang, too—real goons, some of them, that I'd swear never stepped inside asteel plant before. I've had orders to get as many of 'our boys' in aspossible. They wouldn't tell me why. I don't know what it is they'replanning. I've tried to pump them, but they're acting pretty cagey about it.I don't think they trust me any more. I'm losing the right touch, I guess.All I know is they're getting set to pull something here."

"Thanks for warning me."

"I'll try to get the dope on it. I'll try my damndest to get it in time."He turned brusquely and started off, but stopped. "Mr. Rearden, if it were upto you, you would have hired me?"

"I would have, gladly and at once."

"Thank you, Mr. Rearden," he said, his voice solemn and low, then walkedaway.

Rearden stood looking after him, seeing, with a tearing smile of pity,what it was that the ex-relativist, the ex-pragmatist, the ex-amoralist wascarrying away with him for consolation.

On the afternoon of September 11, a copper wire broke in Minnesota,stopping the belts of a grain elevator at a small country station of TaggartTranscontinental.

A flood of wheat was moving down the highways, the roads, the abandonedtrails of the countryside, emptying thousands of acres of farmland upon thefragile dams of the railroad's stations. It was moving day and night, thefirst trickles growing into streams, then rivers, then torrents—moving onpalsied trucks with coughing, tubercular motors—on wagons pulled by the rustyskeletons of starving horses—on carts pulled by oxen—on the nerves and lastenergy of men who had lived through two years of disaster for the triumphantreward of this autumn's giant harvest, men who had patched their trucks andcarts with wire, blankets, ropes and sleepless nights, to make them holdtogether for this one more journey, to carry the grain and collapse atdestination, but to give their owners a chance at survival.

Every year, at this season, another movement had gone clicking across thecountry, drawing freight cars from all corners of the continent to theMinnesota Division of Taggart Transcontinental, the beat of train wheelspreceding the creak of the wagons, like an advance echo rigorously planned,ordered and timed to meet the flood. The Minnesota Division drowsed throughthe year, to come to violent life for the weeks of the harvest; fourteenthousand freight cars had jammed its yards each year; fifteen thousand wereexpected this time. The first of the wheat trains had started to channel theflood into the hungry flour mills, then bakeries, then stomachs of thenation—but every train, car and storage elevator counted, and there was nominute or inch of space to spare.

Eddie Willers watched Dagny's face as she went through the cards of heremergency file; he could tell the content of the cards by her expression."The Terminal," she said quietly, closing the file. "Phone the Terminaldownstairs and have them ship half their stock of wire to Minnesota." Eddiesaid nothing and obeyed.

He said nothing, the morning when he put on her desk a telegram from theTaggart office in Washington, informing them of the directive which, due tothe critical shortage of copper, ordered government agents to seize allcopper mines and operate them as a public utility.

"Well," she said, dropping the telegram into the wastebasket, "that's theend of Montana."

She said nothing when James Taggart announced to her that he was issuingan order to discontinue all dining cars on Taggart trains. "We can't affordit any longer," he explained, "we've always lost money on those goddamndiners, and when there's no food to get, when restaurants are closing becausethey can't grab hold of a pound of horse meat anywhere, how can railroads beexpected to do it? Why in hell should we have to feed the passengers, anyway?They're lucky if we give them transportation, they'd travel in cattle cars ifnecessary, let 'em pack their own box lunches, what do we care?—they've gotno other trains to take!"

The telephone on her desk had become, not a voice of business, but analarm siren for the desperate appeals of disaster. "Miss Taggart.

we have no copper wire!" "Nails, Miss Taggart, plain nails, could you tellsomebody to send us a keg of nails?" "Can you find any paint.

Miss Taggart, any sort of waterproof paint anywhere?"

But thirty million dollars of subsidy money from Washington had beenplowed into Project Soybean—an enormous acreage in Louisiana, where a harvestof soybeans was ripening, as advocated and organized by Emma Chalmers, forthe purpose of reconditioning the dietary habits of the nation. Emma

Chalmers, better known as Kip's Ma, was an old sociologist who had hung aboutWashington for years, as other women of her age and type hang about barrooms.For some reason which nobody could define, the death of her son in the tunnelcatastrophe had given her in Washington an aura of martyrdom, heightened byher recent conversion to Buddhism. "The soybean is a much more sturdy,nutritious and economical plant than all the extravagant foods which ourwasteful, self-indulgent diet has conditioned us to expect," Kip's Ma hadsaid over the radio; her voice always sounded as if it were falling in drops,not of water, but of mayonnaise.

"Soybeans make an excellent substitute for bread, meat, cereals andcoffee—and if all of us were compelled to adopt soybeans as our staple diet,it would solve the national food crisis and make it possible to feed morepeople. The greatest food for the greatest number—that's my slogan. At a timeof desperate public need, it's our duty to sacrifice our luxurious tastes andeat our way back to prosperity by adapting ourselves to the simple, wholesomefoodstuff on which the peoples of the Orient have so nobly subsisted forcenturies. There's a great deal that we could learn from the peoples of theOrient."

"Copper tubing, Miss Taggart, could you get some copper tubing for ussomewhere?" the voices were pleading over her telephone. "Rail spikes, MissTaggart!" "Screwdrivers, Miss Taggart!" "Light bulbs, Miss Taggart, there'sno electric light bulbs to be had anywhere within two hundred miles of us!"

But five million dollars was being spent by the office of MoraleConditioning on the People's Opera Company, which traveled through thecountry, giving free performances to people who, on one meal a day, could notafford the energy to walk to the opera house. Seven million dollars had beengranted to a psychologist in charge of a project to solve the world crisis byresearch into the nature of brother-love. Ten million dollars had beengranted to the manufacturer of a new electronic cigarette lighter—but therewere no cigarettes in the shops of the country. There were flashlights on themarket, but no batteries; there were radios, but no tubes; there werecameras, but no film. The production of airplanes had been declared"temporarily suspended." Air travel for private purposes had been forbidden,and reserved exclusively for missions of "public need." An industrialisttraveling to save his factory was not considered as publicly needed and couldnot get aboard a plane; an official traveling to collect taxes was and could.

"People are stealing nuts and bolts out of rail plates, Miss Taggart,stealing them at night, and our stock is running out, the division storehouseis bare, what are we to do, Miss Taggart?"

But a super-color-four-foot-screen television set was being erected fortourists in a People's Park in Washington—and a super-cyclotron for the studyof cosmic rays was being erected at the State Science Institute, to becompleted in ten years.

"The trouble with our modern world," Dr. Robert Stadler said over theradio, at the ceremonies launching the construction of the cyclotron, "isthat too many people think too much. It is the cause of all our current fearsand doubts. An enlightened citizenry should abandon the superstitious worshipof logic and the outmoded reliance on reason.

Just as laymen leave medicine to doctors and electronics to engineers, sopeople who are not qualified to think should leave all thinking to theexperts and have faith in the experts' higher authority. Only experts areable to understand the discoveries of modern science, which have proved thatthought is an illusion and that the mind is a myth."

"This age of misery is God's punishment to man for the sin of relying onhis mind!" snarled the triumphant voices of mystics of every sect and sort,on street corners, in rain-soaked tents, in crumbling temples. "This worldordeal is the result of man's attempt to live by reason! This is where

thinking, logic and science have brought you! And there's to be no salvationuntil men realize that their mortal mind is impotent to solve their problemsand go back to faith, faith in God, faith in a higher authority!"

And confronting her daily there was the final product of it all, the heirand collector—Cuffy Meigs, the man impervious to thought.

Cuffy Meigs strode through the offices of Taggart Transcontinental,wearing a semi-military tunic and slapping a shiny leather briefcase againsthis shiny leather leggings. He carried an automatic pistol in one pocket anda rabbit's foot in the other.

Cuffy Meigs tried to avoid her; his manner was part scorn, as if heconsidered her an impractical idealist, part superstitious awe, as if shepossessed some incomprehensible power with which he preferred not to tangle.He acted as if her presence did not belong to his view of a railroad, yet asif hers were the one presence he dared not challenge.

There was a touch of impatient resentment in his manner toward Jim, as ifit were Jim's duty to deal with her and to protect him; just as he expectedJim to keep the railroad in running order and leave him free for activitiesof more practical a nature, so he expected Jim to keep her in line, as partof the equipment.

Beyond the window of her office, like a patch of adhesive plaster stuckover a wound on the sky, the page of the calendar hung blank in the distance.The calendar had never been repaired since the night of Francisco's farewell.The officials who had rushed to the tower, that night, had knocked thecalendar's motor to a stop, while tearing the film out of the projector. Theyhad found the small square of Francisco's message, pasted into the strip ofnumbered days, but who had pasted it there, who had entered the locked roomand when and how, was never discovered by the three commissions stillinvestigating the case. Pending the outcome of their efforts, the page hungblank and still above the city.

It was blank on the afternoon of September 14, when the telephone rang inher office. "A man from Minnesota," said the voice of her secretary.

She had told her secretary that she would accept all calls of this kind.They were the appeals for help and her only source of information. At a timewhen the voices of railroad officials uttered nothing but sounds designed toavoid communication, the voices of nameless men were her last link to thesystem, the last sparks of reason and tortured honesty flashing brieflythrough the miles of Taggart track.

"Miss Taggart, it is not my place to call you, but nobody else will,"

said the voice that came on the wire, this time; the voice sounded youngand too calm. "In another day or two, a disaster's going to happen here thelike of which they've never seen, and they won't be able to hide it anylonger, only it will be too late by then, and maybe it's too late already."

"What is it? Who are you?"

"One of your employees of the Minnesota Division, Miss Taggart.

In another day or two, the trains will stop running out of here—and youknow what that means, at the height of the harvest. At the height of thebiggest harvest we've ever had. They'll stop, because we have no cars. Theharvest freight cars have not been sent to us this year."

"What did you say?" She felt as if minutes went by between the words ofthe unnatural voice that did not sound like her own.

"The cars have not been sent. Fifteen thousand should have been here bynow. As far as I could learn, about eight thousand cars is all we got. I'vebeen calling Division Headquarters for a week. They've been telling me not toworry. Last time, they told me to mind my own damn business. Every shed,silo, elevator, warehouse, garage and dance hall along the track is filledwith wheat. At the Sherman elevators, there's a line of farmers' trucks andwagons two miles long, waiting on the road. At Lakewood Station, the square

is packed solid and has been for three nights. They keep telling us it's onlytemporary, the cars are coming and we'll catch up. We won't. There aren't anycars coming.

I've called everyone I could. I know, by the way they answer. They know,and not one of them wants to admit it. They're scared, scared to move orspeak or ask or answer. All they're thinking of is who will be blamed whenthat harvest rots here around the stations—and not of who's going to move it.Maybe nobody can, now. Maybe there's nothing you can do about it, either. ButI thought you're the only person left who'd want to know and that somebodyhad to tell you."

"I . . ." She made an effort to breathe. "I see . . . Who are you?"

"The name wouldn't matter. When I hang up, I will have become a deserter.I don't want to stay here to see it when it happens. I don't want any part ofit any more. Good luck to you, Miss Taggart."

She heard the click. "Thank you," she said over a dead wire.

The next time she noticed the office around her and permitted herself tofeel, it was noon of the following day. She stood in the middle of theoffice, running stiff, spread fingers through a strand of hair, brushing itback off her face—and for an instant, she wondered where she was and what wasthe unbelievable thing that had happened in the last twenty hours. What shefelt was horror, and she knew that she had felt it from the first words ofthe man on the wire, only there had been no time to know it.

There was not much that remained in her mind of the last twenty hours,only disconnected bits, held together by the single constant that had madethem possible—by the soft, loose faces of men who fought to hide fromthemselves that they knew the answers to the questions she asked.

From the moment when she was told that the manager of the Car ServiceDepartment had been out of town for a week and had left no address where onecould reach him—she knew that the report of the man from Minnesota was true.Then came the faces of the assistants in the Car Service Department, whowould neither confirm the report nor deny it, but kept showing her papers,orders, forms, file cards that bore words in the English language, but noconnection to intelligible facts. "Were the freight cars sent to Minnesota?""Form 357W is filled out in every particular, as required by the office ofthe Co-ordinator in conformance with the instructions of the comptroller andby Directive 11-493."

"Were the freight cars sent to Minnesota?" "The entries for the months ofAugust and September have been processed by—" "Were the freight cars sent toMinnesota?" "My files indicate the locations of freight cars by state, date,classification and—" "Do you know whether the cars were sent to Minnesota?""As to the interstate motion of freight cars, I would have to refer you tothe files of Mr. Benson and of—"

There was nothing to learn from the files. There were careful entries,each conveying four possible meanings, with references which led toreferences which led to a final reference which was missing from the files.It did not take her long to discover that the cars had not been sent toMinnesota and that the order had come from Cuffy Meigs—

but who had carried it out, who had tangled the trail, what steps had beentaken by what compliant men to preserve the appearance of a safely normaloperation, without a single cry of protest to arouse some braver man'sattention, who had falsified the reports, and where the cars had gone—seemed,at first, impossible to learn.

Through the hours of that night—while a small, desperate crew under thecommand of Eddie Willers kept calling every division point, every yard,depot, station, spur and siding of Taggart Transcontinental for every freightcar in sight or reach, ordering them to unload, drop, dump, scuttle anythingand proceed to Minnesota at once, while they kept calling the yards, stations

and presidents of every railroad still half in existence anywhere across themap, begging for cars for Minnesota—she went through the task of tracing fromface to coward's face the destination of the freight cars that had vanished.

She went from railroad executives to wealthy shippers to Washingtonofficials and back to the railroad—by cab, by phone, by wire—pursuing a trailof half-uttered hints. The trail approached its end when she heard the pinch-lipped voice of a public relations, woman in a Washington office, sayingresentfully over the telephone wire, "Well, after all, it is a matter ofopinion whether wheat is essential to a nation's welfare-there are those of more progressive views who feel that the soybean is,perhaps, of far greater value"—and then, by noon, she stood in the middle ofher office, knowing that the freight cars intended for the wheat of Minnesotahad been sent, instead, to carry the soybeans from the Louisiana swamps ofKip's Ma's project.

The first story of the Minnesota disaster appeared in the newspapers threedays later. It reported that the farmers who had waited in. the streets ofLakewood for six days, with no place to store their wheat and no trains tocarry it, had demolished the local courthouse, the mayor's home and therailroad station. Then the stories vanished abruptly and the newspapers keptsilent, then began to print admonitions urging people not to believeunpatriotic rumors.

While the flour mills and grain markets of the country were screaming overthe phones and the telegraph wires, sending pleas to New York and delegationsto Washington, while strings of freight cars from random corners of thecontinent were crawling like rusty caterpillars across the map in thedirection of Minnesota—the wheat and hope of the country were waiting toperish along an empty track, under the unchanging green lights of signalsthat called for motion to trains that were not there.

At the communication desks of Taggart Transcontinental, a small crew keptcalling for freight cars, repeating, like the crew of a sinking ship, anS.O.S, that remained unheard. There were freight cars held loaded for monthsin the yards of the companies owned by the friends of pull-peddlers, whoignored the frantic demands to unload the cars and release them. "You cantell that railroad to—" followed by untransmissible words, was the message ofthe Smather Brothers of Arizona in answer to the S.O.S. of New York.

In Minnesota, they were seizing cars from every siding, from the MesabiRange, from the ore mines of Paul Larkin where the cars had stood waiting fora dribble of iron. They were pouring wheat into ore cars, into coal cars,into boarded stock cars that went spilling thin gold trickles along the trackas they clattered off. They were pouring wheat into passenger coaches, overseats, racks and fixtures, to send it off, to get it moving, even if it wentmoving into track-side ditches in the sudden crash of breaking springs, inthe explosions set off by burning journal boxes.

They fought for movement, for movement with no thought of destination, formovement as such, like a paralytic under a stroke, struggling in wild, stiff,incredulous jerks against the realization that movement was suddenlyimpossible. There were no other railroads: James Taggart had killed them;there were no boats on the Lakes: Paul Larkin had destroyed them. There wasonly the single line of rail and a net of neglected highways.

The trucks and wagons of waiting farmers started trickling blindly downthe roads, with no maps, no gas, no feed for horses—moving south, southtoward the vision of flour mills awaiting them somewhere, with no knowledgeof the distances ahead, but with the knowledge of death behind them—moving,to collapse on the roads, in the gullies, in the breaks of rotted bridges.One farmer was found, half a mile south of the wreck of his truck, lying deadin a ditch, face down, still clutching a sack of wheat on his shoulders. Thenrain clouds burst over the prairies of Minnesota; the rain went eating the

wheat into rot at the waiting railroad stations; it went hammering the pilesspilled along the roads, washing gold kernels into the soil.

The men in Washington were last to be reached by the panic. They watched,not the news from Minnesota, but the precarious balance of their friendshipsand commitments; they weighed, not the fate of the harvest, but theunknowable result of unpredictable emotions in

unthinking men of unlimited power. They waited, they evaded all pleas,they declared, "Oh, ridiculous, there's nothing to worry about! Those Taggartpeople have always moved that wheat on schedule, they'll find some way tomove it!"

Then, when the State Chief Executive of Minnesota sent a request toWashington for the assistance of the Army against the riots he was unable tocontrol—three directives burst forth within two hours, stopping all trains inthe country, commandeering all cars to speed to Minnesota.

An order signed by Wesley Mouch demanded the immediate release of thefreight cars held in the service of Kip's Ma. But by that time, it was toolate. Ma's freight cars were in California, where the soybeans had been sentto a progressive concern made up of sociologists preaching the cult ofOriental austerity, and of businessmen formerly in the numbers racket.

In Minnesota, farmers were setting fire to their own farms, they weredemolishing grain elevators and the homes of county officials, they werefighting along the track of the railroad, some to tear it up, some to defendit with their lives—and, with no goal to reach save violence, they were dyingin the streets of gutted towns and in the silent gullies of a roadless night.

Then there was only the acrid stench of grain rotting in half-smoulderingpiles—a few columns of smoke rising from the plains, standing still in theair over blackened ruins—and, in an office in Pennsylvania, Hank Reardensitting at his desk, looking at a list of men who had gone bankrupt: theywere the manufacturers of farm equipment, who could not be paid and would notbe able to pay him.

The harvest of soybeans did not reach the markets of the country: it hadbeen reaped prematurely, it was moldy and unfit for consumption.

On the night of October 15, a copper wire broke in New York City, in anunderground control tower of the Taggart Terminal, extinguishing the lightsof the signals.

It was only the breach of one wire, but it produced a short circuit in theinterlocking traffic system, and the signals of motion or danger disappearedfrom the panels of the control towers and from among the strands of rail. Thered and green lenses remained red and green, not with the living radiance ofsight, but with the dead stare of glass eyes. On the edge of the city, acluster of trains gathered at the entrance to the Terminal tunnels and grewthrough the minutes of stillness, like blood dammed by a clot inside a vein,unable to rush into the chambers of the heart.

Dagny, that night, was sitting at a table in a private dining room of theWayne-Falkland. The wax of candles was dripping down on the white camelliasand laurel leaves at the base of the silver candlesticks, arithmeticalcalculations were penciled on the damask linen tablecloth, and a cigar buttwas swimming in a finger bowl. The six men in formal dinner jackets, facingher about the table, were Wesley Mouch, Eugene Lawson, Dr. Floyd Ferris, ClemWeatherby, James Taggart and Cuffy Meigs.

"Why?" she had asked, when Jim had told her that she had to attend thatdinner. "Well . . . because our Board of Directors is to meet next week.""And?" "You're interested in what's going to be decided about our MinnesotaLine, aren't you?" "Is that going to be decided at the Board meeting?'1"Well, not exactly." "Is it going to be decided at this dinner?" "Notexactly, but . . . oh, why do you always have to be so definite? Nothing's

ever definite. Besides, they insisted that they wanted you to come." "Why?""Isn't that sufficient?"

She did not ask why those men chose to make all their crucial decisions atparties of this kind; she knew that they did. She knew that behind theclattering, lumbering pretense of their council sessions, committee meetingsand mass debates, the decisions were made in advance, in furtive informality,at luncheons, dinners and bars, the graver the issue, the more casual themethod of settling it. It was the first time that they had asked her, theoutsider, the enemy, to one of those secret sessions; it was, she thought, anacknowledgment of the fact that they needed her and, perhaps, the first stepof their surrender; it was a chance she could not leave untaken.

But as she sat in the candlelight of the dining room, she felt certainthat she had no chance; she felt restlessly unable to accept that certainty,since she could not grasp its reason, yet lethargically reluctant to pursueany inquiry.

"As, I think, you will concede, Miss Taggart, there now seems to be noeconomic justification for the continued existence of a railroad line inMinnesota, which . . ." "And even Miss Taggart will, I'm sure, agree thatcertain temporary retrenchments seem to be indicated, until . . ." "Nobody,not even Miss Taggart, will deny that there are times when it is necessary tosacrifice the parts for the sake of the whole . . ." As she listened to thementions of her name tossed into the conversation at half-hour intervals,tossed perfunctorily, with the speaker's eyes never glancing in herdirection, she wondered what motive had made them want her to be present. Itwas not an attempt to delude her into believing that they were consultingher, but worse: an attempt to delude themselves into believing that she hadagreed. They asked her questions at times and interrupted her before she hadcompleted the first sentence of the answer. They seemed to want her approval,without having to know whether she approved or not.

Some crudely childish form of self-deception had made them choose to giveto this occasion the decorous setting of a formal dinner. They acted as ifthey hoped to gain, from the objects of gracious luxury, the power and thehonor of which those objects had once been the product and symbol—they acted,she thought, like those savages who devour the corpse of an adversary in thehope of acquiring his strength and his virtue.

She regretted that she was dressed as she was. "It's formal," Jim had toldher, "but don't overdo it . . . what I mean is, don't look too rich . . .business people should avoid any appearance of arrogance these days . . . notthat you should look shabby, but if you could just seem to suggest . . .well, humility ... it would please them, you know, it would make them feelbig." "Really?" she had said, turning away.

She wore a black dress that looked as if it were no more than a piece ofcloth crossed over her breasts and falling to her feet in the soft folds of aGrecian tunic; it was made of satin, a satin so light and thin that it couldhave served as the stuff of a nightgown. The luster of the cloth, streamingand shifting with her movements, made it look as if the light of the room sheentered were her personal property, sensitively obedient to-the motions ofher body, wrapping her in a sheet of radiance more luxurious than the textureof brocade, underscoring the pliant fragility of her figure, giving her anair of so natural an elegance that it could afford to be scornfully casual.She wore a single piece of jewelry, a diamond clip at the edge of the blackneckline, that kept flashing with the imperceptible motion of her breath,like a transformer converting a flicker into fire, making one conscious, notof the gems, but of the living beat behind them; it flashed like a militarydecoration, like wealth worn as a badge of honor. She wore no other ornament,only the sweep of a black velvet cape, more arrogantly, ostentatiouslypatrician than any spread of sables.

She regretted it now, as she looked at the men before her; she felt theembarrassing guilt of pointlessness, as if she had tried to defy the figuresin a waxworks. She saw a mindless resentment in their eyes and a sneakingtrace of the lifeless, sexless, smutty leer with which men look at a posteradvertising burlesque.

"It's a great responsibility," said Eugene Lawson, "to hold the decisionof life or death over thousands of people and to sacrifice them whennecessary, but we mast have the courage to do it." His soft lips seemed totwist into a smile.

"The only factors to consider are land acreage and population figures,"said Dr. Ferris in a statistical voice, blowing smoke rings at the ceiling."Since it is no longer possible to maintain both the Minnesota Line and thetranscontinental traffic of this railroad, the choice is between Minnesotaand those states west of the Rockies which were cut off by the failure of theTaggart Tunnel, as well as the neighboring states of Montana, Idaho, Oregon,which means, practically speaking, the whole of the Northwest. When youcompute the acreage and the number of heads in both areas, it's obvious thatwe should scuttle Minnesota rather than give up our lines of communicationover a third of a continent."

"1 won't give up the continent," said Wesley Mouch, staring down at hisdish of ice cream, his voice hurt and stubborn.

She was thinking of the Mesabi Range, the last of the major sources ofiron ore, she was thinking of the Minnesota farmers, such as were left ofthem, the best producers of wheat in the country—she was thinking that theend of Minnesota would end Wisconsin, then Michigan, then Illinois—she wasseeing the red breath of the factories dying out over the industrial East—asagainst the empty miles of western sands, of scraggly pastures and abandonedranches.

"The figures indicate," said Mr. Weatherby primly, "that the continuedmaintenance of both areas seems to be impossible. The railway track andequipment of one has to be dismantled to provide the material for themaintenance of the other."

She noticed that Clem Weatherby, their technical expert on railroads, wasthe man of least influence among them, and Cuffy Meigs—of most.

Cuffy Meigs sat sprawled in his chair, with a look of patronizingtolerance for their game of wasting time on discussions. He spoke little, butwhen he did, it was to snap decisively, with a contemptuous grin, "Pipe down,Jimmy!" or, "Nuts, Wes, you're talking through your hat!" She noticed thatneither Jim nor Mouch resented it. They seemed to welcome the authority ofhis assurance; they were accepting him as their master.

"We have to be practical," Dr. Ferris kept saying. "We have to. bescientific."

"I need the economy of the country as a whole," Wesley Mouch keptrepeating. "I need the production of a nation."

"Is it economics that you're talking about? Is it production?" she said,whenever her cold, measured voice was able to seize a brief stretch of theirtune. "If it is, then give us leeway to save the Eastern states. That's allthat's left of the country—and of the world. If you let us save that, we'llhave a chance to rebuild the rest. If not, it's the end.

Let the Atlantic Southern take care of such transcontinental traffic asstill exists. Let the local railroads take care of the Northwest. But letTaggart Transcontinental drop everything else—yes, everything—and devote allour resources, equipment and rail to the traffic of the Eastern states. Letus shrink back to the start of this country, but let us hold that start.We'll run no trains west of the Missouri. We'll become a local railroad—thelocal of the industrial East. Let us save our industries.

There's nothing left to save in the West. You can run agriculture forcenturies by manual labor and oxcarts. But destroy the last of this country'sindustrial plant—and centuries of effort won't be able to rebuild it or togather the economic strength to make a start. How do you expect ourindustries—or railroads—to survive without steel? How do you expect any steelto be produced if you cut off the supply of iron ore? Save Minnesota,whatever's left of it. The country? You have no country to save, if itsindustries perish. You can sacrifice a leg or an arm. You can't save a bodyby sacrificing its heart and brain. Save our industries. Save Minnesota. Savethe Eastern Seaboard."

It was no use. She said it as many times, with as many details,statistics, figures, proofs, as she could force out of her weary mind intotheir evasive hearing. It was no use. They neither refuted nor agreed; theymerely looked as if her arguments were beside the point. There was a sound ofhidden emphasis in their answers, as if they were giving her an explanation,but in a code to which she had no key.

"There's trouble in California," said Wesley Mouch sullenly. "Their statelegislature's been acting pretty huffy. There's talk of seceding from theUnion."

"Oregon is overrun by gangs of deserters," said Clem Weatherby cautiously."They murdered two tax collectors within the last three months."

"The importance of industry to a civilization has been grosslyoveremphasized," said Dr. Ferris dreamily. "What is now known as the People'sState of India has existed for centuries without any industrial developmentwhatever."

"People could do with fewer material gadgets and a sterner discipline ofprivations," said Eugene Lawson eagerly. "It would be good for them."

"Oh hell, are you going to let that dame talk you into letting the richestcountry on earth slip through your fingers?" said Cuffy Meigs, leaping to hisfeet. "It's a fine time to give up a whole continent—and in exchange forwhat? For a dinky little state that's milked dry, anyway!

I say ditch Minnesota, but hold onto your transcontinental dragnet.

With trouble and riots everywhere, you won't be able to keep people inline unless you have transportation—troop transportation—unless you hold yoursoldiers within a few days' journey of any point on the continent. This is notime to retrench. Don't get yellow, listening to all that talk. You've gotthe country in your pocket. Just keep it there."

"In the long run—" Mouch started uncertainly.

"In the long run, we'll all be dead," snapped Cuffy Meigs. He was pacingrestlessly. "Retrenching, hell! There's plenty of pickings left in Californiaand Oregon and all those places. What I've been thinking is, we ought tothink of expanding—the way things are, there's nobody to stop us, it's therefor the taking—Mexico, and Canada maybe—it ought to be a cinch."

Then she saw the answer; she saw the secret premise behind their words.With all of their noisy devotion to the age of science, their hystericallytechnological jargon, their cyclotrons, their sound rays, these men weremoved forward, not by the image of an industrial skyline, but by the visionof that form of existence which the industrialists had swept away—the visionof a fat, unhygienic rajah of India, with vacant eyes staring in indolentstupor out of stagnant layers of flesh, with nothing to do but run preciousgems through his fingers and, once in a while, stick a knife into the body ofa starved, toil-dazed, germeaten creature, as a claim to a few grains of thecreature's rice, then claim it from hundreds of millions of such creaturesand thus let the rice grains gather into gems.

She had thought that industrial production was a value not to bequestioned by anyone; she had thought that these men's urge to expropriatethe factories of others was their acknowledgment of the factories value. She,

born of the industrial revolution, had not held as conceivable, had forgottenalong with the tales of astrology and alchemy, what these men knew in theirsecret, furtive souls, knew not by means of thought, but by means of thatnameless muck which they called their instincts and emotions: that so long asmen struggle to stay alive, they'll never produce so little but that the manwith the club won't be able to seize it and leave them still less, providedmillions of them are willing to submit—that the harder their work and theless their gain, the more submissive the fiber of their spirit—that men wholive by pulling levers at an electric switchboard, are not easily ruled, butmen who live by digging the soil with their naked fingers, are—that thefeudal baron did not need electronic factories in order to drink his brainsaway out of jeweled goblets, and neither did the rajahs of the People's Stateof India.

She saw what they wanted and to what goal their "instincts," which theycalled unaccountable, were leading them. She saw that Eugene Lawson, thehumanitarian, took pleasure at the prospect of human starvation—and Dr.Ferris, the scientist, was dreaming of the day when men would return to thehand-plow.

Incredulity and indifference were her only reaction: incredulity, becauseshe could not conceive of what would bring human beings to such a state-indifference, because she could not regard those who reached it, as human anylonger. They went on talking, but she was unable to speak or to listen. Shecaught herself feeling that her only desire was now to get home and fallasleep.

"Miss Taggart," said a politely rational, faintly anxious voice—andjerking her head up, she saw the courteous figure of a waiter, "the assistantmanager of the Taggart Terminal is on the telephone, requesting permission tospeak to you at once. He says it's an emergency."

It was a relief to leap to her feet and get out of that room, even if inanswer to the call of some new disaster. It was a relief to hear theassistant manager's voice, even though it was saying, "The interlocker systemis out, Miss Taggart. The signals are dead. There are eight incoming trainsheld up and six outgoing. We can't move them in or out of the tunnels, wecan't find the chief engineer, we can't locate the breach of the circuit, wehave no copper wire for repairs, we don't know what to do, we—" "111 be rightdown," she said, dropping the receiver.

Hurrying to the elevator, then half-running through the stately lobby ofthe Wayne-Falkland, she felt herself returning to life at the summons of thepossibility of action.

Taxicabs were rare, these days, and none came in answer to the doorman'swhistle. She started rapidly down the street, forgetting what she wore,wondering why the touch of the wind seemed too cold and too ultimately close.

Her mind on the Terminal ahead, she was startled by the loveliness of asudden sight: she saw the slender figure of a woman hurrying toward her, theray of a lamppost sweeping over lustrous hair, naked arms, the swirl of ablack cape and the flame of a diamond on her breast, with the long, emptycorridor of a city street behind her and skyscrapers drawn by lonely dots oflight. The knowledge that she was seeing her own reflection in the sidemirror of a florist's window, came an instant too late: she had felt theenchantment of the full context to which that image and city belonged. Thenshe felt a stab of desolate loneliness, much wider a loneliness than the spanof an empty street—

and a stab of anger at herself, at the preposterous contrast between herappearance and the context of this night and age.

She saw a taxi turn a corner, she waved to it and leaped in, slamming thedoor against a feeling which she hoped to leave behind her, on the emptypavement by a florist's window. But she knew—in self mockery, in bitterness,

in longing—that this feeling was the sense of expectation she had felt at herfirst ball and at those rare times when she had wanted the outward beauty ofexistence to match its inner splendor. What a time to think of it! she toldherself in mockery—not now! she cried to herself in anger—but a desolatevoice kept asking her quietly to the rattle of the taxi's wheels: You whobelieved you must live for your happiness, what do you now have left of it?—what are you gaining from your struggle?—yes! say it honestly: what's in itfor you?—or are you becoming one of those abject altruists who has no answerto that question any longer? . . . Not now!—she ordered, as the glowingentrance to the Taggart Terminal flared up in the rectangle of the taxi'swindshield.

The men in the Terminal manager's office were like extinguished signals,as if here, too, a circuit were broken and there were no living current tomake them move. They looked at her with a kind of inanimate passivity, as ifit made no difference whether she let them stay still or threw a switch toset them in motion.

The Terminal manager was absent. The chief engineer could not be found; hehad been seen at the Terminal two hours ago, not since. The assistant managerhad exhausted his power of initiative by volunteering to call her. The othersvolunteered nothing. The signal engineer was a college-boyish man in histhirties, who kept saying aggressively, "But this has never happened before,Miss Taggart! The interlocker has never failed. It's not supposed to fail. Weknow our jobs, we can take care of it as well as anybody can—but not if itbreaks down when it's not supposed to!" She could not tell whether thedispatcher, an elderly man with years of railroad work behind him, stillretained his intelligence but chose to hide it, or whether months ofsuppressing it had choked it for good, granting him the safety of stagnation,"We don't know what to do, Miss Taggart." "We don't know whom to call forwhat sort of permission." "There are no rules to cover an emergency of thiskind." "There aren't even any rules about who's to lay down the rules forit! "

She listened, she reached for the telephone without a word of explanation,she ordered the operator to get her the operating vice-president of theAtlantic Southern in Chicago, to get him at his home and out of bed, ifnecessary.

"George? Dagny Taggart," she said, when the voice of her competitor cameon the wire. "Will you lend me the signal engineer of your Chicago terminal,Charles Murray, for twenty-four hours? . . .

Yes. . . . Right. . . . Put him aboard a plane and get him here as fast asyou can. Tell him we'll pay three thousand dollars. . . . Yes, for the oneday. . . . Yes, as bad as that. . . . Yes, I'll pay him in cash, out of myown pocket, if necessary. I'll pay whatever it takes to bribe his way aboarda plane, but get him on the first plane out of Chicago. . . . No, George, notone—not a single mind left on Taggart Transcontinental. . . . Yes, I'll getall the papers, exemptions, exceptions and emergency permissions. . . .Thanks, George. So long."

She hung up and spoke rapidly to the men before her, not to hear thestillness of the room and of the Terminal, where no sound of wheels wasbeating any longer, not to hear the bitter words which the stillness seemedto repeat: Not a single mind left on Taggart Transcontinental. . . .

"Get a wrecking train and crew ready at once,'1 she said. "Send them outon the Hudson Line, with orders to tear down every foot of copper wire, anycopper wire, lights, signals, telephone, everything that's company property.Have it here by morning." "But, Miss Taggart! Our service on the Hudson Lineis only temporarily suspended and the Unification Board has refused uspermission to dismantle the line!" "I'll be responsible." "But how are wegoing to get the wrecking train out of here, when there aren't any signals?"

"There will be signals in half an hour." "How?" "Come on," she said, risingto her feet.

They followed her as she hurried down the passenger platforms, past thehuddling, shifting groups of travelers by the motionless trains. She hurrieddown a narrow catwalk, through a maze of rail, past blinded signals andfrozen switches, with nothing but the beat of her satin sandals to fill thegreat vaults of the underground tunnels of Taggart Transcontinental, with thehollow creaking of planks under the slower steps of men trailing her like areluctant echo—she hurried to the lighted glass cube of Tower A, that hung inthe darkness like a crown without a body, the crown of a deposed ruler abovea realm of empty tracks.

The tower director was too expert a man at too exacting a job to be ablewholly to conceal the dangerous burden of intelligence. He understood whatshe wanted him to do from her first few words and answered only with anabrupt "Yes, ma'am," but he was bent over his charts by the time the otherscame following her up the iron stairway, he was grimly at work on the mosthumiliating job of calculation he had ever had to perform in his long career.She knew how fully he understood it, from a single glance he threw at her, aglance of indignation and endurance that matched some emotion he had caughtin her face, "We'll do it first and feel about it afterwards," she said, eventhough he had made no comment. "Yes, ma'am," he answered woodenly.

His room, on the top of an underground tower, was like a glass verandahoverlooking what had once been the swiftest, richest and most orderly streamin the world. He had been trained to chart the course of over ninety trainsan hour and to watch them roll safely through a maze of tracks and switchesin and out of the Terminal, under his glass walls and his fingertips. Now,for the first time, he was looking out at the empty darkness of a driedchannel.

Through the open door of the relay room, she saw the tower men standinggrimly idle—the men whose jobs had never permitted a moment's relaxation-standing by the long rows that looked like vertical copper pleats, likeshelves of books and as much of a monument to human intelligence. The pull ofone of the small levers, which protruded like bookmarks from the shelves,threw thousands of electric circuits into motion, made thousands of contactsand broke as many others, set dozens of switches to clear a chosen course anddozens of signals to light it, with no error left possible, no chance, nocontradiction —an enormous complexity of thought condensed into one movementof a human hand to set and insure the course of a train, that hundreds oftrains might safely rush by, that thousands of tons of metal and lives mightpass in speeding streaks a breath away from one another, protected by nothingbut a thought, the thought of the man who devised the levers. But they—shelooked at the face of her signal engineer —they believed that that muscularcontraction of a hand was the only thing required to move the traffic—and nowthe tower men stood idle—

and on the great panels in front of the tower director, the red and greenlights, which had flashed announcing the progress of trains at a distance ofmiles, were now so many glass beads—like the glass beads for which anotherbreed of savages had once sold the Island of Manhattan.

"Calf all of your unskilled laborers," she said to the assistant manager,"the section hands, trackwalkers, engine wipers, whoever's in the Terminalright now, and have them come here at once."

"Here?"

"Here," she said, pointing at the tracks outside the tower. "Call all yourswitchmen, too. Phone your storehouse and have them bring here every lanternthey can lay their hands on, any sort of lantern, conductors' lanterns, stormlanterns, anything."

"Lanterns, Miss Taggart?"

"Get going.""Yes, ma'am."

"What is it we're doing, Miss Taggart?" asked the dispatcher."We're going to move trains and we're going "to move them manually.""Manually?" said the signal engineer.

"Yes, brother! Now why should you be shocked?" She could not resist it."Man is only muscles, isn't he? We're going back—back to where there were nointerlocking systems, no semaphores, no electricity —back to the time whentrain signals were not steel and wire, but men holding lanterns. Physicalmen, serving as lampposts. You've advocated it long enough—you got what youwanted. Oh, you thought that your tools would determine your ideas? But ithappens to be the other way around—and now you're going to see the kind oftools your ideas have determined!"

But even to go back took an act of intelligence—she thought, feeling theparadox of her own position, as she looked at the lethargy of the facesaround her.

"How will we work the switches, Miss Taggart?"

"By hand."

"And the signals?"

"By hand."

"How?"

"By placing a man with a lantern at every signal post.""How? There's not enough clearance.""We'll use alternate tracks."

"How will the men know which way to throw the switches?"

"By written orders."

"Uh?"

"By written orders—just as in the old days." She pointed to the towerdirector. "He's working out a schedule of how to move the trains and whichtracks to use. He'll write out an. order for every signal and switch, he'llpick some men as runners and they'll keep delivering the orders to everypost—and it will take hours to do what used to take minutes, but we'll getthose waiting trains into the Terminal and out on the road-"

"We're to work it that way all night?"

"And all day tomorrow—until the engineer who's got the brains for it,shows you how to repair the interlocker."

"There's nothing in the union contracts about men standing with lanterns.There's going to be trouble. The union will object."

"Let them come to me."

"The Unification Board will object."

"I'll be responsible."

"Well, I wouldn't want to be held for giving the orders—""I'll give the orders."

She stepped out on the landing of the iron stairway that hung on the sideof the tower; she was fighting for self-control. It seemed to her for amoment as if she, too, were a precision instrument of high technology, leftwithout electric current, trying to run a transcontinental railroad by meansof her two hands. She looked out at the great, silent darkness of the Taggartunderground—and she felt a stab of burning humiliation that she should nowsee it brought down to the level where human lampposts would stand in itstunnels as its last memorial statues.

She could barely distinguish the faces of the men when they gathered atthe foot of the tower. They came streaming silently through the darkness andstood without moving in the bluish murk, with blue bulbs on the walls behindthem and patches of light falling on their shoulders from the tower'swindows. She could see the greasy garments, the slack, muscular bodies, thelimply hanging arms of men drained by the unrewarding exhaustion of a labor

that required no thought. These were the dregs of the railroad, the youngermen who could now seek no chance to rise and the older men who had neverwanted to seek it.

They stood in silence, not with the apprehensive curiosity of workmen, butwith the heavy indifference of convicts.

"The orders which you are about to receive have come from me,"

she said, standing above them on the iron stairs, speaking with resonantclarity. "The men who'll issue them are acting under my instructions.

The interlocking control system has broken down. It will now be replacedby human labor. Train service will be resumed at once."

She noticed some faces in the crowd staring at her with a peculiar look:with a veiled resentment and the kind of insolent curiosity that made hersuddenly conscious of being a woman. Then she remembered what she wore, andthought that it did look preposterous—and then, at the sudden stab of someviolent impulse that felt like defiance and like loyalty to the full, realmeaning of the moment, she threw her cape back and stood in the raw glare oflight, under the sooted columns, like a figure at a formal reception, sternlyerect, flaunting the luxury of naked arms, of glowing black satin, of adiamond flashing like a military cross.

"The tower director will assign switchmen to their posts. He will selectmen for the job of signaling trains by means of lanterns and for the task oftransmitting his orders. Trains will—"

She was fighting to drown a bitter voice that seemed to be saying: That'sall they're fit for, these men, if even that . . . there's not a single mindleft anywhere on Taggart Transcontinental. . . .

"Trains will continue to be moved in and out of the Terminal. You willremain at your posts until—"

Then she stopped. It was his eyes and hair that she saw first—theruthlessly perceptive eyes, the streaks of hair shaded from gold to copperthat seemed to reflect the glow of sunlight in the murk of the underground-she saw John Gait among the chain gang of the mindless, John Gait in greasyoveralls and rolled shirt sleeves, she saw his weightless way of standing,his face held lifted, his eyes looking at her as if he had seen this momentmany moments ago.

"What's the matter, Miss Taggart?"

It was the soft voice of the tower director, who stood by her side, withsome sort of paper in his hand—and she thought it was strange to emerge froma span of unconsciousness which had been the span of the sharpest awarenessshe had ever experienced, only she did not know how long it had lasted orwhere she was or why. She had been aware of Gait's face, she had been seeing,in the shape of his mouth, in the planes of his cheeks, the crackup of thatimplacable serenity which had always been his, but he still retained it inhis look of acknowledging the breach, of admitting that this moment was toomuch even for him.

She knew that she went on speaking, because those around her looked as ifthey were listening, though she could not hear a sound, she went on speakingas if carrying out a hypnotic order given to herself some endless time ago,knowing only that the completion of that order was a form of defiance againsthim, neither knowing nor hearing her own words.

She felt as if she were standing in a radiant silence where sight was heronly capacity and his face was its only object, and the sight of his face waslike a speech in the form of a pressure at the base of her throat. It seemedso natural that he should be here, it seemed so unendurably simple—she feltas if the shock were not his presence, but the presence of others on thetracks of her railroad, where he belonged and they did not. She was seeingthose moments aboard a train when, at its plunge into the tunnels, she hadfelt a sudden, solemn tension, as if this place were showing her in naked

simplicity the essence of her railroad and of her life, the union ofconsciousness and matter, the frozen form of a mind's ingenuity givingphysical existence to its purpose; she had felt a sense of sudden hope, as ifthis place held the meaning of all of her values, and a sense of secretexcitement, as if a nameless promise were awaiting her under the ground—itwas right that she should now meet him here, he had been the meaning and thepromise—she was not seeing his clothing any longer, nor to what level herrailroad had reduced him—she was seeing only the vanishing torture of themonths when he had been outside her reach—she was seeing in his face theconfession of what those months had cost him —the only speech she heard wasas if she were saying to him: This is the reward for all my days—and as if hewere answering: For all of mine.

She knew that she had finished speaking to the strangers when she saw thatthe tower director had stepped forward and was saying something to them,glancing at a list in his hand. Then, drawn by a sense of irresistiblecertainty, she found herself descending the stairs, slipping away from thecrowd, not toward the platforms and the exit, but into the darkness of theabandoned tunnels. You will follow me, she thought —and felt as if thethought were not in words, but in the tension of her muscles, the tension ofher will to accomplish a thing she knew to be outside her power, yet she knewwith certainty that it would be accomplished and by her wish . . . no, shethought, not by her wish, but by its total Tightness. You will follow me—itwas neither plea nor prayer nor demand., but the quiet statement of a fact,it contained the whole of her power of knowledge and the whole of theknowledge she had earned through the years. You will follow me, if we arewhat we are, you and I, if we live, if the world exists, if you know themeaning of this moment and can't let it slip by, as others let it slip, intothe senselessness of the unwilled and unreached. You will follow me—she feltan exultant assurance, which was neither hope nor faith, but an act ofworship for the logic of existence.

She was hurrying down the remnants of abandoned rails, down the long, darkcorridors twisting through granite. She lost the sound of the director'svoice behind her. Then she felt the beat of her arteries and heard, inanswering rhythm, the beat of the city above her head, but she felt as if sheheard the motion of her blood as a sound filling the silence, and the motionof the city as the beat inside her body—and, far behind her, she heard thesound of steps. She did not glance back.

She went faster.

She went past the locked iron door where the remnant of his motor wasstill hidden, she did not stop, but a faint shudder was her answer to thesudden glimpse of the unity and logic in the events of the last two years. Astring of blue lights went on into the darkness, over patches of glisteninggranite, over broken sandbags spilling drifts on the rails, over rusty pilesof scrap metal. When she heard the steps coming closer, she stopped andturned to look back.

She saw a sweep of blue light flash briefly on the shining strands ofGait's hair, she caught the pale outline of his face and the dark hollows ofhis eyes. The face disappeared, but the sound of his steps served as the linkto the next blue light that swept across the line of his eyes, the eyes thatremained held level, directed ahead—and she felt certain that she had stayedin his sight from the moment he had seen her at the tower.

She heard the beat of the city above them—these tunnels, she had oncethought, were the roots of the city and of all the motion reaching to thesky—but they, she thought, John Gait and she, were the living power withinthese roots, they were the start and aim and meaning—he, too, she thought,heard the beat of the city as the beat of his body.

She threw her cape back, she stood defiantly straight, as he had seen herstand on the steps of the tower—as he had seen her for the first time, tenyears ago, here, under the ground—she was hearing the words of hisconfession, not as words, but by means of that beating which made it sodifficult to breathe: You looked like a symbol of luxury and you belonged inthe place that was its source . . . you seemed to bring the enjoyment of lifeback to its rightful owners . . .

you had a look of energy and of its reward, together . . . and I was thefirst man who had ever stated in what manner these two were inseparable. . .

The next span of moments was like flashes of light in stretches of blindedunconsciousness—the moment when she saw his face, as he stopped beside her,when she saw the unastonished calm, the leashed intensity, the laughter ofunderstanding in the dark green eyes—the moment when she knew what he saw inher face, by the tight, drawn harshness of his lips—the moment when she felthis mouth on hers, when she felt the shape of his mouth both as an absoluteshape and as a liquid filling her body—then the motion of his lips down theline of her throat, a drinking motion that left a trail of bruises—then thesparkle of her diamond clip against the trembling copper of his hair.

Then she was conscious of nothing but the sensations of her body, becauseher body acquired the sudden power to let her know her most complex values bydirect perception. Just as her eyes had the power to translate wave lengthsof energy into sight, just as her ears had the power to translate vibrationsinto sound, so her body now had the power to translate the energy that hadmoved all the choices of her life, into immediate sensory perception. It wasnot the pressure of a hand that made her tremble, but the instantaneous sumof its meaning, the knowledge that it was his hand, that it moved as if herflesh were his possession, that its movement was his signature of acceptanceunder the whole of that achievement which was herself—it was only a sensationof physical pleasure, but it contained her worship of him, of everything thatwas his person and his life—from the night of the mass meeting in a factoryin Wisconsin, to the Atlantis of a valley hidden in the Rocky Mountains, tothe triumphant mockery of the green eyes of the superlative intelligenceabove a worker's figure at the foot of the tower—it contained her pride inherself and that it should be she whom he had chosen as his mirror, that itshould be her body which was now giving him the sum of his existence, as hisbody was giving her the sum of hers. These were the things it contained—butwhat she knew was only the sensation of the movement of his hand on herbreasts.

He tore off her cape and she felt the slenderness of her own body by meansof the circle of his arms, as if his person were only a tool for hertriumphant awareness of herself, but that self were only a tool for herawareness of him. It was as if she were reaching the limit of her capacity tofeel, yet what she felt was like a cry of impatient demand, which she was nowincapable of naming, except that it had the same quality of ambition as thecourse of her life, the same inexhaustible quality of radiant greed.

He pulled her head back for a moment, to look straight into her eyes, tolet her see his, to let her know the full meaning of their actions, as ifthrowing the spotlight of consciousness upon them for the meeting of theireyes in a moment of intimacy greater than the one to come.

Then she felt the mesh of burlap striking the skin of her shoulders, shefound herself lying on the broken sandbags, she saw the long, tight gleam ofher stockings, she felt his mouth pressed to her ankle, then rising in atortured motion up the line of her leg, as if he wished to own its shape bymeans of his lips, then she felt her teeth sinking into the flesh of his arm,she felt the sweep of his elbow knocking her head aside and his mouth seizingher lips with a pressure more viciously painful than hers—then she felt, when

it hit her throat, that which she knew only as an upward streak of motionthat released and united her body into a single shock of pleasure—then sheknew nothing but the motion of his body and the driving greed that wentreaching on and on, as if she were not a person any longer, only a sensationof endless reaching for the impossible—then she knew that it was possible,and she gasped and lay still, knowing that nothing more could be desired,ever.

He lay beside her, on his back, looking up at the darkness of the granitevault above them, she saw him stretched on the jagged slant of sandbags as ifhis body were fluid in relaxation, she saw the black wedge of her cape flungacross the rails at their feet, there were beads of moisture twinkling on thevault, shifting slowly, running into invisible cracks, like the lights of adistant traffic. When he spoke, his voice sounded as if he were quietlycontinuing a sentence in answer to the questions in her mind, as if he hadnothing to hide from her any longer and what he owed her now was only the actof undressing his soul, as simply as he would have undressed his body: ". . .this is how I've watched you for ten years . . . from here, from under theground under your feet . . . knowing every move you made in your office atthe top of the building, but never seeing you, never enough . . . ten yearsof nights, spent waiting to catch a glimpse of you, here, on the platforms,when you boarded a train. . . .

Whenever the order came down to couple your car, I'd know of it and waitand see you come down the ramp, and wish you didn't walk so fast ... it wasso much like you, that walk, I'd know it anywhere . . .

your walk and those legs of yours ... it was always your legs that I'dsee first, hurrying down the ramp, going past me as I looked up at you from adark side track below. ... I think I could have molded a sculpture of yourlegs, I knew them, not with my eyes, but with the palms of my hands when Iwatched you go by . . . when I turned back to my work . . . when I went homejust before sunrise for the three hours of sleep which I didn't get . . ."

"I love you," she said, her voice quiet and almost toneless except for afragile sound of youth.

He closed his eyes, as if letting the sound travel through the yearsbehind them. "Ten years, Dagny . . ., except that once there were a few weekswhen I had you before me, in plain sight, within reach, not hurrying away,but held still, as on a lighted stage, a private stage for me to watch . . .and I watched you for hours through many evenings ... in the lighted windowof an office that was called the John Gait Line. . . . And one night—"

Her breath was a faint gasp. "Was it you, that night?"

"Did you see me?"

"I saw your shadow ... on the pavement . . . pacing back and forth . . .it looked like a struggle ... it looked like—" She stopped; she did notwant to say "torture."

"It was," he said quietly. "That night, I wanted to walk in, to face you,to speak, to . . . That was the night I came closest to breaking my oath,when I saw you slumped across your desk, when I saw you broken by the burdenyou were carrying—"

"John, that night, it was you that I was thinking of . . . only I didn'tknow it . . ."

"But, you see, 7 knew it,"

". . .it was you, all my life, through everything I did and everything Iwanted ...""I know it."

"John, the hardest was not when I left you in the valley ... it was—""Your radio speech, the day you returned?""Yes! Were you listening?"

"Of course. I'm glad you did it. It was a magnificent thing to do. And I—Iknew it, anyway."

"You knew . . . about Hank Rearden?""Before I saw you in the valley."

"Was it . . . when you learned about him, had you expected it?""No. "

"Was it . . . ?" she stopped.

"Hard? Yes. But only for the first few days. That next night ... Do youwant me to tell you what I did the night after I learned it?""Yes."

"I had never seen Hank Rearden, only pictures of him in the newspapers.

I knew that he was in New York, that night, at some conference of bigindustrialists. I wanted to have just one look at him. I went to wait at theentrance of the hotel where that conference was held. There were brightlights under the marquee of the entrance, but it was dark beyond, on thepavement, so I could see without being seen, there were a few loafers andvagrants hanging around, there was a drizzle of rain and we clung to thewalls of the building. One could tell the members of the conference when theybegan filing out, by their clothes and their manner—ostentatiously prosperousclothes and a manner of overbearing timidity, as if they were guiltily tryingto pretend that they were what they appeared to be for that moment. Therewere chauffeurs driving up their cars, there were a few reporters delayingthem for questions and hangers-on trying to catch a word from them. They wereworn men, those industrialists, aging, flabby, frantic with the effort todisguise uncertainty. And then I saw him. He wore an expensive trenchcoat anda hat slanting across his eyes. He walked swiftly, with the kind of assurancethat has to be earned, as he'd earned it. Some of his fellow industrialistspounced on him with questions, and those tycoons were acting like hangers-onaround him. I caught a glimpse of him as he stood with his hand on the doorof his car, his head lifted, I saw the brief flare of a smile under theslanting brim, a confident smile, impatient and a little amused. And then,for one instant, I did what I had never done before, what most men wrecktheir lives on doing—I saw that moment out of context, I saw the world as hemade it look, as if it matched him, as if he were its symbol—I saw a world ofachievement, of unenslaved energy, of unobstructed drive through purposefulyears to the enjoyment of one's reward—I saw, as I stood in the rain in acrowd of vagrants, what my years would have brought me, if that world hadexisted, and I felt a desperate longing—he was the image of everything Ishould have been . . . and he had everything that should have been mine. . .. But it was only a moment. Then I saw the scene in full context again and inall of its actual meaning—I saw what price he was paying for his brilliantability, what torture he was enduring in silent bewilderment, struggling tounderstand what I had understood—I saw that the world he suggested, did notexist and was yet to be made, I saw him again for what he was, the symbol ofmy battle, the unrewarded hero whom I was to avenge and to release—and then .. . then I accepted what I had learned about you and him. I saw that itchanged nothing, that I should have expected it—that it was right."

He heard the faint sound of her moan and he chuckled softly.

"Dagny, it's not that I don't suffer, it's that I know the unimportance ofsuffering, I know that pain is to be fought and thrown aside, not to beaccepted as part of one's soul and as a permanent scar across one's view ofexistence. Don't feel sorry for me. It was gone right then."

She turned her head to look at him in silence, and he smiled, liftinghimself on an elbow to look down at her face as she lay helplessly still.

She whispered, "You've been a track laborer, here—here!—for twelve years .

"Yes."

"Ever since—"

"Ever since I quit the Twentieth Century."

"The night when you saw me for the first time . . . you were working here,then?"

"Yes. And the morning when you offered to work for me as my cook, I wasonly your track laborer on leave of absence. Do you see why I laughed as Idid?"

She was looking up at his face; hers was a smile of pain, his—of puregaiety, "John ..."

"Say it. But say it all."

"You were here . . . all those years . . .""Yes."

". . . all those years . . . while the railroad was perishing . . .

while I was searching for men of intelligence . . . while I was strugglingto hold onto any scrap of it I could find . . ."

". . . while you were combing the country for the inventor of my motor,while you were feeding James Taggart and Wesley Mouch, while you were namingyour best achievement after the enemy whom you wanted to destroy."

She closed her eyes.

"I was here all those years," he said, "within your reach, inside your ownrealm, watching your struggle, your loneliness, your longing, watching you ina battle you thought you were fighting for me, a battle in which you weresupporting my enemies and taking an endless defeat —I was here, hidden bynothing but an error of your sight, as Atlantis is hidden from men by nothingbut an optical illusion—I was here, waiting for the day when you would see,when you would know that by the code of the world you were supporting, it'sto the darkest bottom of the underground that all the things you valued wouldhave to be consigned and that it's there that you would have to look. I washere. I was waiting for you. I love you, Dagny. I love you more than my life,I who have taught men how life is to be loved. I've taught them also never toexpect the unpaid for—and what I did tonight, I did it with full knowledgethat I would pay for it and that my life might have to be the price,"

"No ! "

He smiled, nodding. "Oh yes. You know that you've broken me for once, thatI broke the decision I had set for myself—but I did it consciously, knowingwhat it meant, I did it, not in blind surrender to the moment, but with fullsight of the consequences and full willingness to bear them. I could not letthis kind of moment pass us by, it was ours, my love, we had earned it. Butyou're not ready to quit and join me—

you don't have to tell me, I know—and since I chose to take what I wantedbefore it was fully mine, I'll have to pay for it, I have no way of knowinghow or when, I know only that if I give in to an enemy, I'll take theconsequences." He smiled in answer to the look on her face.

"No, Dagny, you're not my enemy in mind—and that is what brought me tothis—but you are in fact, in the course you're pursuing, though you don't seeit yet, but I do. My actual enemies are of no danger to me.

You are. You're the only one who can lead them to find me. They wouldnever have the capacity to know what I am, but with your help —they will."

"No ! "

"No, not by your intention. And you're free to change your course, but solong as you follow it, you're not free to escape its logic. Don't frown, thechoice was mine and it's a danger I chose to accept. I am a trader, Dagny, inall things. I wanted you, I had no power to change your decision, I had onlythe power to consider the price and decide whether I could afford it. Icould. My life is mine to spend or to invest —and you, you're"—as if hisgesture were continuing his sentence, he raised her across his arm and kissedher mouth, while her body hung limply in surrender, her hair streaming down,

her head falling back, held only by the pressure of his lips—"you're the onereward I had to have and chose to buy. I wanted you, and if my life is theprice, I'll give it. My life—but not my mind."

There was a sudden glint of hardness in his eyes, as he sat up and smiledand asked, "Would you want me to join you and go to work?

Would you like me to repair that interlocking signal system of yourswithin an hour?"

"No!" The cry was immediate—in answer to the flash of a sudden image, theimage of the men in the private dining room of the Wayne Falkland.He laughed. "Why not?"

"I don't want to see you working as their serf!""And yourself?"

"I think that they're crumbling and that I'll win. I can stand it just alittle longer."

"True, it's just a little longer—not till you win, but till you learn.""I can't let it go!" It was a cry of despair."Not yet," he said quietly.

He got up, and she rose obediently, unable to speak.

"I will remain here, on my job," he said. "But don't try to see me.

You'll have to endure what I've endured and wanted to spare you—

you'll have to go on, knowing where I am, wanting me as I'll want you, butnever permitting yourself to approach me. Don't seek me here.

Don't come to my home. Don't ever let them see us together. And when youreach the end, when you're ready to quit, don't tell them, just chalk adollar sign on the pedestal of Nat Taggart's statue—where it belongs —then gohome and wait. I'll come for you in twenty-four hours."

She inclined her head in silent promise.

But when he turned to go, a sudden shudder ran through her body, like afirst jolt of awakening or a last convulsion of life, and it ended in aninvoluntary cry: "Where are you going?"

"To be a lamppost and stand holding a lantern till dawn—which is the onlywork your world relegates me to and the only work it's going to get."

She seized his arm, to hold him, to follow, to follow him blindly,abandoning everything but the sight of his face. "John!"

He gripped her wrist, twisted her hand and threw it off. "No," he said.

Then he took her hand and raised it to his lips and the pressure of hismouth was more passionate a statement than any he had chosen to confess. Thenhe walked away, down the vanishing line of rail, and it seemed to her thatboth the rail and the figure were abandoning her at the same time.

When she staggered out into the concourse of the Terminal, the first blastof rolling wheels went shuddering through the walls of the building, like thesudden beat of a heart that had stopped. The temple of Nathaniel Taggart wassilent and empty, its changeless light beating down on a deserted stretch ofmarble. Some shabby figures shuffled across it, as if lost in its shiningexpanse. On the steps of the pedestal, under the statue of the austere,exultant figure, a ragged bum sat slumped in passive resignation, like awing-plucked bird with no place to go, resting on any chance cornice.

She fell down on the steps of the pedestal, like another derelict, herdust-smeared cape wrapped tightly about her, she sat still, her head on herarm, past crying or reeling or moving.

It seemed to her only that she kept seeing a figure with a raised armholding a light, and it looked at times like the Statue of Liberty and thenit looked like a man with sun-streaked hair, holding a lantern against amidnight sky, a red lantern that stopped the movement of the world.

"Don't take it to heart, lady, whatever it is," said the bum, in a tone ofexhausted compassion. "Nothing's to be done about it, anyway. . . .

What's the use, lady? Who is John Gait?"

CHAPTER VITHE CONCERTO OF DELIVERANCE

On October 20, the steel workers' union of Rearden Steel demanded a raisein wages.

Hank Rearden learned it from the newspaper; no demand had been presentedto him and it had not been considered necessary to inform him. The demand wasmade to the Unification Board; it was not explained why no other steelcompany was presented with a similar claim.

He was unable to tell whether the demanders did or did not represent hisworkers, the Board's rules on union elections having made it a matterimpossible to define. He learned only that the group consisted of thosenewcomers whom the Board had slipped into his mills in the past few months.

On October 23, the Unification Board rejected the union's petition,refusing to grant the raise. If any hearings had been held on the matter,Rearden had not known about it. He had not been consulted, informed ornotified. He had waited, volunteering no questions.

On October 25, the newspapers of the country, controlled by the same menwho controlled the Board, began a campaign of commiseration with the workersof Rearden Steel. They printed stories about the refusal of the wage raise,omitting any mention of who had refused it or who held the exclusive legalpower to refuse, as if counting on the public to forget legal technicalitiesunder a barrage of stories implying that an employer was the natural cause ofall miseries suffered by employees. They printed a story describing thehardships of the workers of Rearden Steel under the present rise in the costof their living—next to a story describing Hank Rearden's profits, of fiveyears ago. They printed a story on the plight of a Rearden worker's wifetrudging from store to store in a hopeless quest for food—next to a storyabout a champagne bottle broken over somebody's head at a drunken party givenby an unnamed steel tycoon at a fashionable hotel; the steel tycoon had beenOrren Boyle, but the story mentioned no names. "Inequalities still existamong us," the newspapers were saying, "and cheat us of the benefits of ourenlightened age." "Privations have worn the nerves and temper of the people.The situation is reaching the danger point. We fear an outbreak of violence.""We fear an outbreak of violence," the newspapers kept repeating, On October28, a group of the new workers at Rearden Steel attacked a foreman andknocked the tuyeres off a blast furnace. Two days later, a similar groupbroke the ground-floor windows of the administration building. A new workersmashed the gears of a crane, upsetting a ladle of molten metal within a yardof five bystanders. "Guess I went nuts, worrying about my hungry kids," hesaid, when arrested. "This is no time to theorize about who's right orwrong," the newspapers commented. "Our sole concern is the fact that aninflammatory situation is endangering the steel output of the country."

Rearden watched, asking no questions. He waited, as if some finalknowledge were in the process of unraveling before him, a process not to behastened or stopped. No—he thought through the early dusk of autumn evenings,looking out the window of his office—no, he was not indifferent to hismills;4but the feeling which had once been passion for a living entity wasnow like the wistful tenderness one feels for the memory of the loved anddead. The special quality of what one feels for the dead, he thought, is thatno action is possible any longer.

On the morning of October 31, he received a notice informing him that allof his property, including his bank accounts and safety deposit boxes, hadbeen attached to satisfy a delinquent judgment obtained against him in atrial involving a deficiency in his personal income tax of three years ago.It was a formal notice, complying with every requirement of the law—except

that no such deficiency had ever existed and no such trial had ever takenplace.

"No," he said to his indignation-choked attorney, "don't question them,don't answer, don't object." "But this is fantastic!" "Any more fantasticthan the rest?" "Hank, do you want me to do nothing? To take it lying down?""No, standing up. And I mean, standing. Don't move. Don't act." "But they'veleft you helpless." "Have they?" he asked softly, smiling.

He had a few hundred dollars in cash, left in his wallet, nothing else.

But the odd, glowing warmth in his mind, like the feel of a distanthandshake, was the thought that in a secret safe of his bedroom there lay abar of solid gold, given to him by a gold-haired pirate.

Next day, on November 1, he received a telephone call from Washington,from a bureaucrat whose voice seemed to come sliding down the wire on itsknees in protestations of apology. "A mistake, Mr. Rearden! It was nothingbut an unfortunate mistake! That attachment was not intended for you. Youknow how it is nowadays, with the inefficiency of all office help and withthe amount of red tape we're tangled in, some bungling fool mixed the recordsand processed the attachment order against you—when it wasn't your case atall, it was, in fact, the case of a soap manufacturer! Please accept ourapologies, Mr. Rearden, our deepest personal apologies at the top level." Thevoice slid to a slight, expectant pause. "Mr. Rearden . . . ?" "I'mlistening." "I can't tell you how sorry we are to have caused you anyembarrassment or inconvenience. And with all those damn formalities that wehave to go through—you know how it is, red tape!—it will take a few days,perhaps a week, to de-process that order and to lift the attachment.

. . . Mr. Rearden?" "I heard you." "We're desperately sorry and ready tomake any amends within our power. You will, of course, be entitled to claimdamages for any inconvenience this might cause you, and we are prepared topay. We won't contest it. You will, of course, file such a claim and—" "Ihave not said that." "Uh? No, you haven't . . . that

is . . . well, what have you said, Mr. Rearden?" "I have said nothing."

Late on the next afternoon, another voice came pleading from Washington.This one did not seem to slide, but to bounce on the telephone wire with thegay virtuosity of a tight-rope walker. It introduced itself as Tinky Hollowayand pleaded that Rearden attend a conference, "an informal little conference,just a few of us, the top-level few," to be held in New York, at the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, day after next.

"There have been so many misunderstandings in the past few weeks!" saidTinky Holloway. "Such unfortunate misunderstandings—

and so unnecessary! We could straighten everything out in a jiffy, Mr.

Rearden, if we had a chance to have a little talk with you. We'reextremely anxious to see you."

"You can issue a subpoena for me any time you wish."

"Oh, no! no! no!" The voice sounded frightened. "No, Mr. Rearden —whythink of such things? You don't understand us, we're anxious to meet you on afriendly basis, we're seeking nothing but your voluntary co-operation."Holloway paused tensely, wondering whether he had heard the faint sound of adistant chuckle; he waited, but heard nothing else.

"Mr. Rearden?"

"Yes?"

"Surely, Mr. Rearden, at a time like this, a conference with us could beto your great advantage."

"A conference—about what?"

"You've encountered so many difficulties—and we're anxious to help you inany way we can."

"I have not asked for help."

"These are precarious times, Mr. Rearden, the public mood is so uncertainand inflammatory, so ... so dangerous . . . and we want to be able toprotect you."

"I have not asked for protection."

"But surely you realize that we're in a position to be of value to you.and if there's anything you want from us, any . . .""There isn't."

"But you must have problems you'd like to discuss with us.""I haven't."

"Then . . . well, then" —giving up the attempt at the play of granting afavor, Holloway switched to an open plea—"then won't you just give us ahearing?"

"If you have anything to say to me,"

"We have, Mr. Rearden, we certainly have! That's all we're asking for—ahearing. Just give us a chance. Just come to this conference.

You wouldn't be committing yourself to anything—" He said itinvoluntarily, and stopped, hearing a bright, mocking stab of life inRearden's voice, an unpromising-sound, as Rearden answered: "I know it."

"Well, I mean . . . that is . . . well, then, will you come?"

"All Tight," said Rearden. "I'll come."

He did not listen to Holloway's assurances of gratitude, he noted onlythat Holloway kept repeating, "At seven P.M., November fourth, Mr. Rearden .. . November fourth . . ." as if the date had some special significance.

Rearden dropped the receiver and lay back in his chair, looking at theglow of furnace flames on the ceiling of his office. He knew that theconference was a trap; he knew also that he was walking into it with nothingfor any trappers to gain.

Tinky Holloway dropped the receiver, in his Washington office, and sat uptensely, frowning. Claude Slagenhop, president of Friends of Global Progress,who had sat in an armchair, nervously chewing a matchstick, glanced up at himand asked, "Not so good?"

Holloway shook his head. "He'll come, but . . . no, not so good."

He added, "I don't think he'll take it."

"That's what my punk told me."

"I know."

"The punk said we'd better not try it."

"God damn your punk! We've got to! We'll have to risk it!"The punk was Philip Rearden who, weeks ago, had reported to ClaudeSlagenhop: "No, he won't let me in, he won't give me a job, I've tried, asyou wanted me to, I've tried my best, but it's no use, he won't let me setfoot inside his mills. And as to his frame of mind-listen, it's bad. It's worse than anything I expected. I know him and Ican tell you that you won't have a chance. He's pretty much at the end of hisrope. One more squeeze will snap it. You said the big boys wanted to know.Tell them not to do it. Tell them he . . . Claude, God help us, if they doit, they'll lose him!" "Well, you're not of much help,"

Slagenhop had said dryly, turning away. Philip had seized his sleeve andasked, his voice shrinking suddenly into open anxiety, "Say, Claude - . .according to ... to Directive 10-289 . . . if he goes, there's . . .there's to be no heirs?" "That's right." "They'd seize the mills and . . .and everything?" 'That's the law." "But . . . Claude, they wouldn't do thatto me, would they?" "They don't want him to go. You know that. Hold him, ifyou can." "But I can't! You know I can't! Because of my political ideas and .. . and everything I've done for you, you know what he thinks of me! I haveno hold on him at all!" "Well, that's your tough luck." "Claude!" Philip hadcried in panic. "Claude, they won't leave me out in the cold, will they? Ibelong, don't I?

They've always said I belonged, they've always said they needed me . . .they said they needed men like me, not like him, men with my . . . my sort ofspirit, remember? And after all I've done for them, after all my faith andservice and loyalty to the cause—" "You damn fool," Slagenhop had snapped,"of what use are you to us without him?"

On the morning of November 4, Hank Rearden was awakened by the ringing ofthe telephone. He opened his eyes to the sight of a clear, pale sky, the skyof early dawn, in the window of his bedroom, a sky the delicate color ofaquamarine, with the first rays of an invisible sun giving a shade ofporcelain pink to Philadelphia's ancient roof tops.

For a moment, while his consciousness had a purity to equal the sky's,while he was aware of nothing but himself and had not yet reharnessed hissoul to the burden of alien memories, he lay still, held by the sight and bythe enchantment of a world to match it, a world where the style of existencewould be a continuous morning.

The telephone threw him back into exile: it was screaming at spacedintervals, like a nagging, chronic cry for help, the kind of cry that did notbelong in his world. He lifted the receiver, frowning. "Hello?"

"Good morning, Henry," said a quavering voice; it was his mother.

"Mother—at this hour?" he asked dryly.

"Oh, you're always up at dawn, and I wanted to catch you before you wentto the office."

"Yes? What is it?"

"I've got to see you, Henry. I've got to speak to you. Today. Sometimetoday. It's important."

"Has anything happened?"

"No . . . yes . . . that is . . . I've got to have a talk with you inperson. Will you come?"

"I'm sorry, I can't. I have an appointment in New York tonight. If youwant me to come tomorrow—"

"No! No, not tomorrow. It's got to be today. It's got to." There was a dimtone of panic in her voice, but it was the stale panic of chronichelplessness, not the sound of an emergency—except for an odd echo of fear inher mechanical insistence.

"What is it, Mother?"

"I can't talk about it over the telephone, I've got to see you.""Then if you wish to come to the office—"

"No! Not at the office! I've got to sec you alone, where we can talk.

Can't you come here today, as a favor? It's your mother who's asking you afavor. You've never come to see us at all. And maybe you're not the one toblame for it, either. But can't you do it for me this once, if I beg you to?"

"All right, Mother. I'll be there at four o'clock this afternoon."

"That will be fine, Henry. Thank you, Henry. That will be fine."

It seemed to him that there was a touch of tension in the air of themills, that day. It was a touch too slight to define—but the mills, to him,were like the face of a loved wife where he could catch shades of feelingalmost ahead of expression. He noticed small clusters of the new workers,just three or four of them huddling together in conversation —once or twicetoo often. He noticed their manner, a manner suggesting a poolroom corner,not a factory. He noticed a few glances thrown at him as he went by, glancesa shade too pointed and lingering. He dismissed it; it was not quite enoughto wonder about—and he had no time to wonder.

When he drove up to his former home, that afternoon, he stopped his carabruptly at the foot of the hill. He had not seen the house since that May15, six months ago, when he had walked out of it—

and the sight brought back to him the sum of all he had felt in ten yearsof daily home-coming: the strain, the bewilderment, the gray weight of

unconfessed unhappiness, the stern endurance that forbade him to confess it,the desperate innocence of the effort to understand his family . . . theeffort to be just.

He walked slowly up the path toward the door. He felt no emotion, only thesense of a great, solemn clarity. He knew that this house was a monument ofguilt—of his guilt toward himself.

He had expected to see his mother and Philip; he had not expected thethird person who rose, as they did, at his entrance into the living room: itwas Lillian.

He stopped on the threshold. They stood looking at his face and at theopen door behind him. Their faces had a look of fear and cunning, the look ofthat blackmail-through-virtue which he had learned to understand, as if theyhoped to get away with it by means of nothing but his pity, to hold himtrapped, when a single step back could take him out of their reach.

They had counted on his pity and dreaded his anger; they had not daredconsider the third alternative; his indifference.

"What is she doing here?" he asked, turning to his mother, his voicedispassionately flat.

"Lillian's been living here ever since your divorce," she answereddefensively. "I couldn't let her starve on the city pavements, could I?"

The look in his mother's eyes was half-plea, as if she were begging himnot to slap her face, half-triumph, as if she had slapped his. He knew hermotive: it was not compassion, there had never been much love between Lillianand her, it was their common revenge against him, it was the secretsatisfaction of spending his money on the ex-wife he had refused to support.

Lillian's head was poised to bow in greeting, with the tentative hint of asmile on her lips, half-timid, half-brash. He did not pretend to ignore her;he looked at her, as if he were seeing her fully, yet as if no presence werebeing registered in his mind. He said nothing, closed the door and steppedinto the room.

His mother gave a small sigh of uneasy relief and dropped hastily into thenearest chair, watching him, nervously uncertain of whether he would followher example.

"What was it you wanted?" he asked, sitting down.

His mother sat erect and oddly hunched, her shoulders raised, her headhalf-lowered. "Mercy, Henry," she whispered."What do you mean?""Don't you understand me?""No. "

"Well"—she spread her hands in an untidily fluttering gesture ofhelplessness—"well ..." Her eyes darted about, struggling to escape hisattentive glance. "Well, there are so many things to say and . . .

and I don't know how to say them, but . . . well, there's one practicalmatter, but it's not important by itself . . . it's not why I called you here

"What is it?"

"The practical matter? Our allowance checks—Philip's and mine. It's thefirst of the month, but on account of that attachment order, the checkscouldn't come through. You know that, don't you?"

"I know it."

"Well, what are we going to do?""I don't know."

"I mean, what are you going to do about it?""Nothing,"

His mother sat staring at him, as if counting the seconds of silence."Nothing, Henry?"

"I have no power to do anything."

They were watching his face with a kind of searching intensity; he feltcertain that his mother had told him the truth, that immediate financialworry was not their purpose, that it was only the symbol of a much widerissue.

"But, Henry, we're caught short.""So was I."

"But can't you send us some cash or something?""They gave me no warning, no time to get any cash."

"Then . . . Look, Henry, the thing was so unexpected, it scared people, Iguess—the grocery store refuses to give us credit, unless you ask for it. Ithink they want you to sign a credit card or something. So will you speak tothem and arrange it?"

"I will not."

"You won't?" She choked on a small gasp. "Why?"

"I will not assume obligations that I can't fulfill."

"What do you mean?"

"I will not assume debts I have no way of repaying.""What do you mean, no way? That attachment is only some sort oftechnicality, it's only temporary, everybody knows that!""Do they? I don't."

"But, Henry—a grocery bill! You're not sure you'll be able to pay agrocery bill, you, with all the millions you own?"

"I'm not going to defraud the grocer by pretending that I own thosemillions . "

"What are you talking about? Who owns them?""Nobody."

"What do you mean?"

"Mother, I think you understand me fully. I think you understood it beforeI did. There isn't any ownership left in existence or any property. It's whatyou've approved of and believed in for years. You wanted me tied. I'm tied.Now it's too late to play any games about it."

"Are you going to let some political ideas of yours—" She saw the look onhis face and stopped abruptly.

Lillian sat looking down at the floor, as if afraid to glance up at thismoment. Philip sat cracking his knuckles.

His mother dragged her eyes into focus again and whispered, "Don't abandonus, Henry." Some faint stab of life in her voice told him that the lid of herreal purpose was cracking open. "These are terrible times, and we're scared.That's the truth of it, Henry, we're scared, because you're turning away fromus. Oh, I don't mean just that grocery bill, but that's a sign—a year ago youwouldn't have let that happen to us. Now . . . now you don't care." She madean expectant pause.

"Do you?"

"No. "

"Well . . . well, I guess the blame is ours. That's what I wanted to tellyou—that we know we're to blame. We haven't treated you right, all theseyears. We've been unfair to you, we've made you suffer, we've used you andgiven you no thanks in return. We're guilty, Henry, we've sinned against you,and we confess it. What more can we say to you now? Will you find it in yourheart to forgive us?"

"What is it you want me to do?" he asked, in the clear, flat tone of abusiness conference.

"I don't know! Who am I to know? But that's not what I'm talking of rightnow. Not of doing, only of feeling. It's your feeling that I'm begging youfor, Henry—just your feeling—even if we don't deserve it. You're generous andstrong. Will you cancel the past, Henry? Will you forgive us?"

The look of terror in her eyes was real. A year ago, he would have toldhimself that this was her way of making amends; he would have choked hisrevulsion against her words, words which conveyed nothing to him but the fogof the meaningless; he would have violated his mind to give them meaning,even if he did not understand; he would have ascribed to her the virtue ofsincerity in her own terms, even if they were not his. But he was throughwith granting respect to any terms other than his own.

"Will you forgive us?"

"Mother, it would be best not to speak of that. Don't press me to tell youwhy. I think you know it as well as I do. If there's anything you want done,tell me what it is. There's nothing else to discuss.

"But I don't understand you! I don't! That's what I called you here for—toask your forgiveness! Are you going to refuse to answer me?"

"Very well. What would it mean, my forgiveness?"

"Uh?"

"I said, what would it mean?"

. She spread her hands out in an astonished gesture to indicate the self-evident. "Why, it ... it would make us feel better.""Will it change the past?"

"It would make us feel better to know that you've forgiven it.""Do you wish me to pretend that the past has not existed?"

"Oh God, Henry, can't you see? All we want is only to know that you . . .that you feel some concern for us."

"I don't feel it. Do you wish me to fake it?""But that's what I'm begging you for—to feel it!""On what ground?""Ground?"

"In exchange for what?"

"Henry, Henry, it's not business we're talking about, not steel tonnagesand bank balances, it's feelings—and you talk like a trader!""I am one."

What he saw in her eyes was terror—not the helpless terror of strugglingand failing to understand, but the terror of being pushed toward the edgewhere to avoid understanding would no longer be possible.

"Look, Henry," said Philip hastily, "Mother can't understand those things.We don't know how to approach you. We can't speak your language."

"I don't speak yours."

"What she's trying to say is that we're sorry. We're terribly sorry thatwe've hurt you. You think we're not paying for it, but we are.We're suffering remorse."

The pain in Philip's face was real. A year ago, Rearden would have feltpity. Now, he knew that they had held him through nothing but his reluctanceto hurt them, his fear of their pain. He was not afraid of it any longer,"We're sorry, Henry. We know we've harmed you. We wish we could atone for it.But what can we do? The past is past. We can't undo it."

"Neither can I."

"You can accept our repentance, " said Lillian, in a voice glassy withcaution. "I have nothing to gain from you now. I only want you to know thatwhatever I've done, I've done it because I loved you."

He turned away, without answering.

"Henry!" cried his mother. "What's happened to you? What's changed youlike that? You don't seem to be human any more! You keep pressing us foranswers, when we haven't any answers to give. You keep beating us with logic—what's logic at a time like this?—what's logic when people are suffering?"

"We can't help it!" cried Philip.

"We're at your mercy," said Lillian.

They were throwing their pleas at a face that could not be reached.

They did not know—and their panic was the last of their struggle to escapethe knowledge—that his merciless sense of justice, which had been their onlyhold on him, which had made him take any punishment and give them the benefitof every doubt, was now turned against them—that the same force that had madehim tolerant, was now the force that made him ruthless—that the justice whichwould forgive miles of innocent errors of knowledge, would not forgive asingle step taken in conscious evil.

"Henry, don't you understand us?" his mother was pleading.

"I do," he said quietly.

She looked away, avoiding the clarity of his eyes. "Don't you care whatbecomes of us?""I don't."

"Aren't you human?" Her voice grew shrill with anger. "Aren't you capableof any love at all? It's your heart I'm trying to reach, not your mind! Loveis not something to argue and reason and bargain about!

It's something to give! To feel! Oh God, Henry, can't you feel withoutthinking?"

"I never have."

In a moment, her voice came back, low and droning: "We're not as smart asyou are, not as strong. If we've sinned and blundered, it's because we'rehelpless. We need you, you're all we've got—and we're losing you—and we'reafraid. These are terrible times, and getting worse, people are scared todeath, scared and blind and not knowing what to do. How are we to cope withit, if you leave us? We're small and weak and we'll be swept like driftwoodin that terror that's running loose in the world. Maybe we had our share ofguilt for it, maybe we helped to bring it about, not knowing any better, butwhat's done is done—and we can't stop it now. If you abandon us, we're lost.If you give up and vanish, like all those men who—"

It was not a sound that stopped her, it was only a movement of hiseyebrows, the brief, swift movement of a check mark. Then they saw him smile;the nature of the smile was the most terrifying of answers.

"So that's what you're afraid of," he said slowly.

"You can't quit!" his mother screamed in blind panic. "You can't quit now!You could have, last year, but not now! Not today! You can't turn deserter,because now they take it out on your family! They'll leave us penniless,they'll seize everything, they'll leave us to starve, they'll—"

"Keep still!" cried Lillian, more adept than the others at reading dangersigns in Rearden's face.

His face held the remnant of a smile, and they knew that he was not seeingthem any longer, but it was not in their power to know why his smile nowseemed to hold pain and an almost wistful longing, or why he was lookingacross the room, at the niche of the farthest window.

He was seeing a finely sculptured face held composed under the lashing ofhis insults, he was hearing a voice that had said to him quietly, here, inthis room: "It is against the sin of forgiveness that I wanted to warn you."You who had known it then, he thought . . . but he did not finish thesentence in his mind, he let it end in the bitter twist of his smile, becausehe knew what he had been about to think: You who had known it then—forgiveme.

There it was—he thought, looking at his family—the nature of their pleasfor mercy, the logic of those feelings they so righteously proclaimed as non-logical—there was the simple, brutal essence of all men who speak of beingable to feel without thought and of placing mercy over justice.

They had known what to fear; they had grasped and named, before he had,the only way of deliverance left open to him; they had understood thehopelessness of his industrial position, the futility of his struggle, theimpossible burdens descending to crush him; they had known that in reason, in

justice, in self-preservation, his only course was to drop it all and run—yetthey wanted to hold him, to keep him in the sacrificial furnace, to make himlet them devour the last of him in the name of mercy, forgiveness andbrother-cannibal love.

"If you still want me to explain it, Mother," he said very quietly, "ifyou're still hoping that I won't be cruel enough to name what you'repretending not to know, then here's what's wrong with your idea offorgiveness: You regret that you've hurt me and, as your atonement for it,you ask that I offer myself to total immolation."

"Logic!" she screamed. "There you go again with your damn logic!

It's pity that we need, pity, not logic!"

He rose to his feet.

"Wait! Don't go! Henry, don't abandon us! Don't sentence us to perish!Whatever we are, we're human! We want to live!"

"Why, no—" he started in quiet astonishment and ended in quiet horror, asthe thought struck him fully, "I don't think you do. If you did, you wouldhave known how to value me."

As if in silent proof and answer, Philip's face went slowly into anexpression intended as a smile of amusement, yet holding nothing but fear andmalice. "You won't be able to quit and run away," said Philip. "You can't runaway without money."

It seemed to strike its goal; Rearden stopped short, then chuckled,"Thanks, Philip," he said.

"Uh?" Philip gave a nervous jerk of bewilderment.

"So that's the purpose of the attachment order. That's what your friendsare afraid of. I knew they were getting set to spring something on me today.I didn't know that the attachment was their idea of cutting off escape." Heturned incredulously to look at his mother. "And that's why you had to see metoday, before the conference in New York."

"Mother didn't know it!" cried Philip, then caught himself and criedlouder, "I don't know what you're talking about! I haven't said anything! Ihaven't said it!" His fear now seemed to have some much less mystic and muchmore practical quality.

"Don't worry, you poor little louse, I won't tell them that you've told meanything. And if you were trying—"

He did not finish; he looked at the three faces before him, and a suddensmile ended his sentence, a smile of weariness, of pity, of incredulousrevulsion. He was seeing the final contradiction, the grotesque absurdity atthe end of the irrationalists' game: the men in Washington had hoped to holdhim by prompting these three to try for the role of hostages.

"You think you're so good, don't you?" It was a sudden cry and it camefrom Lillian; she had leaped to her feet to bar his exit; her face wasdistorted, as he had seen it once before, on that morning when she hadlearned the name of his mistress. "You're so good! You're so proud ofyourself! Well, I have something to tell you!"

She looked as if she had not believed until this moment that her game waslost. The sight of her face struck him like a last shred completing acircuit, and in sudden clarity he knew what her game had been and why she hadmarried him.

If to choose a person as the constant center of one's concern, as thefocus of one's view of life, was to love—he thought—then it was true that sheloved him; but if, to him, love was a celebration of one's self and ofexistence—then, to the self-haters and life-haters, the pursuit ofdestruction was the only form and equivalent of love. It was for the best ofhis virtues that Lillian had chosen him, for his strength, his confidence,his pride—she had chosen him as one chooses an object of love, as the symbolof man's living power, but the destruction of that power had been her goal.

He saw them as they had been at their first meeting: he, the man ofviolent energy and passionate ambition, the man of achievement, lighted bythe flame of his success and flung into the midst of those pretentious asheswho called themselves an intellectual elite, the burned out remnants ofundigested culture, feeding on the afterglow of the minds of others, offeringtheir denial of the mind as their only claim to distinction, and a craving tocontrol the world as their only lust—she, the woman hanger-on of that elite,wearing their shopworn sneer as her answer to the universe, holding impotenceas superiority and emptiness as virtue—he, unaware of their hatred,innocently scornful of their posturing fraud—she, seeing him as the danger totheir world, as a threat, as a challenge, as a reproach.

The lust that drives others to enslave an empire, had become, in herlimits, a passion for power over him. She had set out to break him, as if,unable to equal his value, she could surpass it by destroying it, as if themeasure of his greatness would thus become the measure of hers, as if—hethought with a shudder—as if the vandal who smashed a statue were greaterthan the artist who had made it, as if the murderer who killed a child weregreater than the mother who had given it birth.

He remembered her hammering derision of his work, his mills, his Metal,his success, he remembered her desire to see him drunk, just once, herattempts to push him into infidelity, her pleasure at the thought that he hadfallen to the level of some sordid romance, her terror on discovering thatthat romance had been an attainment, not a degradation. Her line of attack,which he had found so baffling, had been constant and clear—it was his self-esteem she had sought to destroy, knowing that a man who surrenders his valueis at the mercy of anyone's will; it was his moral purity she had struggledto breach, it was his confident rectitude she had wanted to shatter by meansof the poison of guilt—as if, were he to collapse, his depravity would giveher a right to hers.

For the same purpose and motive, for the same satisfaction, as othersweave complex systems of philosophy to destroy generations, of establishdictatorships to destroy a country, so she, possessing no weapons exceptfemininity, had made it her goal to destroy one man.

Yours was the code of life—he remembered the voice of his lost youngteacher—what, then, is theirs?

"I have something to tell you!" cried Lillian, with the sound of thatimpotent rage which wishes that words were brass knuckles. "You're so proudof yourself, aren't you? You're so proud of your name!

Rearden Steel, Rearden Metal, Rearden Wife! That's what I was, wasn't I?Mrs. Rearden! Mrs. Henry Rearden!" The sounds she was making were now astring of cackling gasps, an unrecognizable corruption of laughter. "Well, Ithink you'd like to know that your wife's been laid by another man! I've beenunfaithful to you, do you hear me? I've been unfaithful, not with some great,noble lover, but with the scummiest louse, with Jim Taggart! Three monthsago! Before your divorce!

While I was your wife! While I was still your wife!"

He stood listening like a scientist studying a subject of no personalrelevance whatever. There, he thought, was the final abortion of the creed ofcollective interdependence, the creed of non-identity, nonproperty, non-fact:the belief that the moral stature of one is at the mercy of the action ofanother.

"I've been unfaithful to you! Don't you hear me, you stainless Puritan?I've slept with Jim Taggart, you incorruptible hero! Don't you hear me? . . .Don't you hear me? . . . Don't you . . . ?"

He was looking at her as he would have looked if a strange woman hadapproached him on the street with a personal confession—a look like theequivalent of the words: Why tell it to me?

Her voice trailed off. He had not known what the destruction of a personwould be like; but he knew that he was seeing the destruction of Lillian. Hesaw it in the collapse of her face, in the sudden slackening of features, asif there were nothing to hold them together, in the eyes, blind, yet staring,staring inward, filled with that terror which no outer threat can equal. Itwas not the look of a person losing her mind, but the look of a mind seeingtotal defeat and, in the same instant, seeing, her own nature for the firsttime—the look of a person seeing that after years of preaching non-existence,she had achieved it.

He turned to go. His mother stopped him at the door, seizing his arm. Witha look of stubborn bewilderment, with the last of her effort at self-deceit,she moaned in a voice of tearfully petulant reproach, "Are you reallyincapable of forgiveness?"

"No, Mother," he answered, "I'm not. I would have forgiven the past—if,today, you had urged me to quit and disappear."

There was a cold wind outside, tightening his overcoat about him like anembrace, there was the great, fresh sweep of country stretching at the footof the hill, and the clear, receding sky of twilight. Like two sunsets endingthe day, the red glow of the sun was a straight, still band in the west, andthe breathing red band in the east was the glow of his mills.

The feel of the steering wheel under his hands and of the smooth highwaystreaming past, as he sped to New York, had an oddly bracing quality. It wasa sense of extreme precision and of relaxation, together, a sense of actionwithout strain, which seemed inexplicably youthful—until he realized thatthis was the way he had acted and had expected always to act, in his youth—and what he now felt was like the simple, astonished question: Why should oneever have to act in any other manner?

It seemed to him that the skyline of New York, when it rose before him,had a strangely luminous clarity, though its shapes were veiled by distance,a clarity that did not seem to rest in the object, but felt as if theillumination came from him. He looked at the great city, with no tie to anyview or usage others had made of it, it was not a city of gangsters orpanhandlers or derelicts or whores, it was the greatest industrialachievement in the history of man, its only meaning was that which it meantto him, there was a personal quality in his sight of it, a quality ofpossessiveness and of unhesitant perception, as if he were seeing it for thefirst time—or the last.

He paused in the silent corridor of the Wayne-Falkland, at the door of thesuite he was to enter; it took him a long moment's effort to lift his handand knock; it was the suite that had belonged to Francisco d'Anconia.

There were coils of cigarette smoke weaving through the air of the drawingroom, among the velvet drapes and bare, polished tables.

With its costly furniture and the absence of all personal belongings, theroom had that air of dreary luxury which pertains to transient occupancy, asdismal as the air of a flophouse. Five figures rose in. the fog at hisentrance: Wesley Mouch, Eugene Lawson, James Taggart, Dr. Floyd Ferris and aslim, slouching man who looked like a rat-faced tennis player and wasintroduced to him as Tinky Holloway.

"All right," said Rearden, cutting off the greetings, the smiles, theoffers of drinks and the comments on the national emergency, "what did youwant?"

"We're here as your friends, Mr. Rearden," said Tinky Holloway, "purely asyour friends, for an informal conversation with a view to closer mutualteamwork."

"We're anxious to avail ourselves of your outstanding ability," saidLawson, "and your expert advice on the country's industrial problems.""It's men like you that we need in Washington," said Dr. Ferris.

"There's no reason why you should have remained an outsider for so long,when your voice is needed at the top level of national leadership."

The sickening thing about it, thought Rearden, was that the speeches wereonly half-lies; the other half, in their tone of hysterical urgency, was theunstated wish to have it somehow be true. "What did you want?" he asked.

"Why ... to listen to you, Mr. Rearden," said Wesley Mouch, the jerk ofhis features imitating a frightened smile; the smile was faked, the fear wasreal. "We ... we want the benefit of your opinion on the nation'sindustrial crisis."

"I have nothing to say."

"But, Mr. Rearden," said Dr. Ferris, "all we want is a chance to co-operate with you."

"I've told you once, publicly, that I don't co-operate at the point of agun. "

"Can't we bury the hatchet at a time like this?" said Lawson beseechingly.

"The gun? Go ahead."

"Uh?"

"It's you who're holding it. Bury it, if you think you can.""That . . . that was just a figure of speech," Lawson explained, blinking,"I was speaking metaphorically."

>7 8

"I wasn't."

"Can't we all stand together for the sake of the country in this hour ofemergency?" said Dr. Ferris. "Can't we disregard our differences of opinion?We're willing to meet you halfway. If there's any aspect of our policy whichyou oppose, just tell us and we'll issue a directive to—"

"Cut it, boys. I didn't come here to help you pretend that I'm not in theposition I'm in and that any halfway is possible between us.

Now come to the point. You've prepared some new gimmick to spring on thesteel industry. What is it?"

"As a matter of fact, " said Mouch, "we do have a vital question to discussin regard to the steel industry, but . . . but your language, Mr. Rearden!"

"We don't want to spring anything on you," said Holloway. "We asked youhere to discuss it with you."

"I came here to take orders. Give them."

"But, Mr. Rearden, we don't want to look at it that way. We don't want togive you orders. We want your voluntary consent."Rearden smiled. "I know it."

"You do?" Holloway started eagerly, but something about Rearden's smilemade him slide into uncertainty. "Well, then—"

"And you, brother," said Rearden, "know that that is the flaw in yourgame, the fatal flaw that will blast it sky-high. Now do you tell me whatclout on my head you're working so hard not to let me notice—or do I gohome?"

"Oh no, Mr. Rearden!" cried Lawson, with a sudden dart of his eyes to hiswrist watch. "You can't go now!—That is, I mean, you wouldn't want to gowithout hearing what we have to say."

"Then let me hear it."

He saw them glancing at one another. Wesley Mouch seemed afraid to addresshim; Mouch's face assumed an expression of petulant stubbornness, like asignal of command pushing the others forward; whatever their qualificationsto dispose of the fate of the steel industry, they had been brought here toact as Mouch's conversational bodyguards.

Rearden wondered about the reason for the presence of James Taggart;Taggart sat in gloomy silence, sullenly sipping a drink, never glancing inhis direction.

"We have worked out a plan," said Dr. Ferris too cheerfully, "which willsolve the problems of the steel industry and which will meet with your fullapproval, as a measure providing for the general welfare, while protectingyour interests and insuring your safety in a—"

"Don't try to tell me what I'm going to think. Give me the facts."

"It is a plan which is fair, sound, equitable and—"

"Don't tell me your evaluation. Give me the facts."

"It is a plan which—" Dr. Ferris stopped; he had lost the habit of namingfacts.

"Under this plan," said Wesley Mouch, "we will grant the industry a fiveper cent increase in the price of steel." He paused triumphantly.Rearden said nothing.

"Of course, some minor adjustments will be necessary," said Hollowayairily, leaping into the silence as onto a vacant tennis court. "A certainincrease in prices will have to be granted to the producers of iron ore—oh,three per cent at most—in view of the added hardships which some of them, Mr.Larkin of Minnesota, for instance, will now encounter, inasmuch as they'llhave to ship their ore by the costly means of trucks, since Mr. James Taggarthas had to sacrifice his Minnesota branch line to the public welfare. And, ofcourse, an increase in freight rates will have to be granted to the country'srailroads—let's say, seven per cent, roughly speaking—in view of theabsolutely essential need for—"

Holloway stopped, like a player emerging from a whirlwind activity tonotice suddenly that no opponent was answering his shots.

"But there will be no increase in wages," said Dr. Ferris hastily. "Anessential point of the plan is that we will grant no increase in wages to thesteel workers, in spite of their insistent demands. We do wish to be fair toyou, Mr. Rearden, and to protect your interests—even at the risk of popularresentment and indignation."

"Of course, if we expect labor to make a sacrifice, " said Lawson, "we mustshow them that management, too, is making certain sacrifices for the sake ofthe country. The mood of labor in the steel industry is extremely tense atpresent, Mr. Rearden, it is dangerously explosive and . . . and in order toprotect you from . . . from . . . " He stopped.

"Yes?" said Rearden. "From?"

"From possible . . . violence, certain measures are necessary, which . . .Look, Jim"—he turned suddenly to James Taggart—"why don't you explain it toMr. Rearden, as a fellow industrialist?"

"Well, somebody's got to support the railroads," said Taggart sullenly,not looking at him. "The country needs railroads and somebody's got to helpus carry the load, and if we don't get an increase in freight rates—"

"No, no, no!" snapped Wesley Mouch. "Tell Mr. Rearden about the working ofthe Railroad Unification Plan."

"Well, the Plan is a full success," said Taggart lethargically, "exceptfor the not fully controllable element of time. It is only a question of timebefore our unified teamwork puts every railroad in the country back on itsfeet. The Plan, I'm in a position to assure you, would work as successfullyfor any other industry."

"No doubt about that," said Rearden, and turned to Mouch. "Why do you askthe stooge to waste my time? What has the Railroad Unification Plan to dowith me?"

"But, Mr. Rearden," cried Mouch with desperate cheerfulness, "that's thepattern we're to follow! That's what we called you here to discuss!""What?"

"The Steel Unification Plan!"

There was an instant of silence, as of breaths drawn after a plunge.

Rearden sat looking at them with a glance that seemed to be a glance ofinterest.

"In view of the critical plight of the steel industry," said Mouch with asudden rush, as if not to give himself time to know what made him uneasyabout the nature of Rearden's glance, "and since steel is the most vitally,crucially basic commodity, the foundation of our entire industrial structure,drastic measures must be taken to preserve the country's steel-makingfacilities, equipment and plant." The tone and impetus of public speakingcarried him that far and no farther. "With this objective in view, our Planis . . . our Plan is . . ."

"Our Plan Is really very simple, " said Tinky Holloway, striving to proveit by the gaily bouncing simplicity of his voice. "We'll lift allrestrictions from the production of steel and every company will produce allit can, according to its ability. But to avoid the waste and danger of dog-eat-dog competition, all the companies will deposit their gross earnings intoa common pool, to be known as the Steel Unification Pool, in charge of aspecial Board. At the end of the year, the Board will distribute theseearnings by totaling the nation's steel output and dividing it by the numberof open-hearth furnaces in existence, thus arriving at an average which willbe fair to all—and every company will be paid according to its need. Thepreservation of its furnaces being its basic need, every company will be paidaccording to the number of furnaces it owns."

He stopped, waited, then added, "That's it, Mr. Rearden," and getting noanswer, said, "Oh, there's a lot of wrinkles to be ironed out, but . . . butthat's it."

Whatever reaction they had expected, it was not the one they saw.

Rearden leaned back in his chair, his eyes attentive, but fixed on space,as if looking at a not too distant distance, then he asked, with an odd noteof quietly impersonal amusement, "Will you tell me just one thing, boys: whatis it you're counting on?"

He knew that they understood. He saw, on their faces, that stubbornlyevasive look which he had once thought to be the look of a liar cheating avictim, but which he now knew to be worse: the look of a man cheating himselfof his own consciousness. They did not answer. They remained silent, as ifstruggling, not to make him forget his question, but to make themselvesforget that they had heard it.

"It's a sound, practical Plan!" snapped James Taggart unexpectedly, withan angry edge of sudden animation in his voice. "It will work!

It has to work! We want it to work!"

No one answered him.

"Mr. Rearden . . . ?" said Holloway timidly.

"Well, let me see," said Rearden. "Orren Boyle's Associated Steel owns 60open-hearth furnaces, one-third of them standing idle and the rest producingan average of 300 tons of steel per furnace per day.

I own 20 open-hearth furnaces, working at capacity, producing tons ofRearden Metal per furnace per day. So we own SO 'pooled'

furnaces with a 'pooled' output of 27,000 tons, which makes an average of337.5 tons per furnace. Each day of the year, I, producing 15,000 tons, willbe paid for 6,750 tons. Boyle, producing 12,000 tons, will be paid for 20,250tons. Never mind the other members of the pool, they won't change the scale,except to bring the average still lower, most of them doing worse than Boyle,none of them producing as much as I. Now how long do you expect me to lastunder your Plan?"

There was no answer, then Lawson cried suddenly, blindly, righteously, "Intime of national peril, it is your duty to serve, suffer and work for thesalvation of the country!"

"I don't see why pumping my earnings into Orren Boyle's pocket is going tosave the country."

"You have to make certain sacrifices to the public welfare!"

"I don't see why Orren Boyle is more 'the public' than I am."

"Oh, it's not a question of Mr. Boyle at all! It's much wider than any oneperson. It's a matter of preserving the country's natural resources—such asfactories—and saving the whole of the nation's industrial plant. We cannotpermit the ruin of an establishment as vast as Mr. Boyle's. The country needsit. "

"I think," said Rearden slowly, "that the country needs me much more thanit needs Orren Boyle."

"But of course!" cried Lawson with startled enthusiasm. "The country needsyou, Mr. Rearden! You do realize that, don't you?"

But Lawson's avid pleasure at the familiar formula of self-immolation,vanished abruptly at the sound of Rearden's voice, a cold, trader's voiceanswering: "I do."

"It's not Boyle alone who's involved," said Holloway pleadingly.

"The country's economy would not be able to stand a major dislocation atthe present moment. There are thousands of Boyle's workers, suppliers andcustomers. What would happen to them if Associated Steel went bankrupt?"

"What will happen to the thousands of my workers, suppliers and customerswhen I go bankrupt?"

"You, Mr. Rearden?" said Holloway incredulously. "But you're the richest,safest and strongest industrialist in the country at this moment!"

"What about the moment after next?"

"Uh?"

"How long do you expect me to be able to produce at a loss?"

"Oh, Mr. Rearden, I have complete faith in you!"

"To hell with your faith! How do you expect me to do it?"

"You'll manage!"

"How?"

There was no answer.

"We can't theorize about the future," cried Wesley Mouch, "when here's animmediate national collapse to avoid! We've got to save the country'seconomy! We've got to do something!" Rearden's imperturbible glance ofcuriosity drove him to heedlessness. "If you don't like it, do you have abetter solution to offer?"

"Sure," said Rearden easily. "If it's production that you want, then getout of the way, junk all of your damn regulations, let Orren Boyle go broke,let me buy the plant of Associated Steel—and it will be pouring a thousandtons a day from every one of its sixty furnaces."

"Oh, but . . . but we couldn't!" gasped Mouch. "That would be monopoly!"

Rearden chuckled. "Okay," he said indifferently, "then let my millssuperintendent buy it. Hell do a better job than Boyle."

"Oh, but that would be letting the strong have an advantage over the weak!We couldn't do that!"

"Then don't talk about saving the country's economy."

"All we want is—" He stopped.

"All you want is production without men who're able to produce, isn't it?"

"That . . . that's theory. That's just a theoretical extreme. All we wantis a temporary adjustment."

"You've been making those temporary adjustments for years. Don't you seethat you've run out of time?"

"That's just theo . . ." His voice trailed off and stopped.

"Well, now, look here," said Holloway cautiously, "it's not as if Mr.

Boyle were actually . . . weak. Mr. Boyle is an extremely able man.

It's just that he's suffered some unfortunate reverses, quite beyond hiscontrol. He had invested large sums in a public-spirited project to assistthe undeveloped peoples of South America, and that copper crash of theirs hasdealt him a severe financial blow. So it's only a matter of giving him achance to recover, a helping hand to bridge the gap, a bit of temporaryassistance, nothing more. All we have to do is just equalize the sacrifice-then everybody will recover and prosper."

"You've been equalizing sacrifice for over a hundred"—he stopped —"forthousands of years," said Rearden slowly. "Don't you see that you're at theend of the road?"

"That's just theory!" snapped Wesley Mouch.

Rearden smiled. "I know your practice," he said softly. "It's your theorythat I'm trying to understand."

He knew that the specific reason behind the Plan was Orren Boyle; he knewthat the working of an intricate mechanism, operated by pull, threat,pressure, blackmail—a mechanism like an irrational adding machine run amuckand throwing up any chance sum at the whim of any moment—had happened to addup to Boyle's pressure upon these men to extort for him this last piece ofplunder. He knew also that Boyle was not the cause of it or the essential toconsider, that Boyle was only a chance rider, not the builder, of theinfernal machine that had destroyed the world, that it was not Boyle who hadmade it possible, nor any of the men in this room. They, too, were onlyriders on a machine without a driver, they were trembling hitchhikers whoknew that their vehicle was about to crash into its final abyss—and it wasnot love or fear of Boyle that made them cling to their course and press ontoward their end, it was something else, it was some one nameless elementwhich they knew and evaded knowing, something which was neither thought norhope, something he identified only as a certain look in their faces, afurtive look saying: I can get away with it. Why?

—he thought. Why do they think they can?

"We can't afford any theories!" cried Wesley Mouch. "We've got to act!""Well, then, I'll offer you another solution. Why don't you take over mymills and be done with it?"

The jolt that shook them was genuine terror."Oh no!" gasped Mouch.

"We wouldn't think of it!" cried Holloway.

"We stand for free enterprise!" cried Dr. Ferris.

"We don't want to harm you!" cried Lawson. "We're your friends, Mr.

Rearden. Can't we all work together? We're your friends."

There, across the room, stood a table with a telephone, the same table,most likely, and the same instrument—and suddenly Rearden felt as if he wereseeing the convulsed figure of a man bent over that telephone, a man who hadthen known what he, Rearden, was now beginning to learn, a man fighting torefuse him the same request which he was now refusing to the present tenantsof this room—he saw the finish of that fight, a man's tortured face lifted toconfront him and a desperate voice saying steadily: "Mr. Rearden, I swear toyou . . . by the woman I love . . . that I am your friend."

This was the act he had then called treason, and this was the man he hadrejected in order to go on serving the men confronting him now.

Who, then, had been the traitor?—he thought; he thought it almost withoutfeeling, without right to feel, conscious of nothing but a solemnly reverentclarity. Who had chosen to give its present tenants the means to acquire thisroom? Whom had he sacrificed and to whose profit?

"Mr. Rearden!" moaned Lawson. "What's the matter?"

He turned his head, saw Lawson's eyes watching him fearfully and guessedwhat look Lawson had caught in his face.

"We don't want to seize your mills!" cried Mouch.

"We don't want to deprive you of your property!" cried Dr. Ferris."You don't understand us!""I'm beginning to."

A year ago, he thought, they would have shot him; two years ago, theywould have confiscated his property; generations ago, men of their kind hadbeen able to afford the luxury of murder and expropriation, the safety ofpretending to themselves and their victims that material loot was their onlyobjective. But their time was running out and his fellow victims had gone,gone sooner than any historical schedule had promised, and they, the looters,were now left to face the undisguised reality of their own goal.

"Look, boys," he said wearily. "I know what you want. You want to eat mymills and have them, too. And all I want to know is this: what makes youthink it's possible?"

"I don't know what you mean," said Mouch in an injured tone of voice. "Wesaid we didn't want your mills."

"All right, I'll say it more precisely: You want to eat me and have me,too. How do you propose to do it?"

"I don't know how you can say that, after we've given you every assurancethat we consider you of invaluable importance to the country, to the steelindustry, to—"

"I believe you. That's what makes the riddle Harder. You consider me ofinvaluable importance to the country? Hell, you consider me of invaluableimportance even to your own necks. You sit there trembling, because you knowthat I'm the last one left to save your lives—and you know that time is asshort as that. Yet you propose a plan to destroy me, a plan which demands,with an idiot's crudeness, without loopholes, detours or escape, that I workat a loss—that I work, with every ton I pour costing me more than I'll getfor it—that I feed the last of my wealth away until we all starve together.That much irrationality is not possible to any man or any looter. For yourown sake—never mind the country's or mine—you must be counting on something.What?"

He saw the getting-away-with-it look on their faces, a peculiar look thatseemed secretive, yet resentful, as if, incredibly, it were he who was hidingsome secret from them.

"I don't see why you should choose to take such a defeatist view of thesituation," said Mouch sullenly.

"Defeatist? Do you really expect me to be able to remain in business underyour Plan?"

"But it's only temporary!"

"There's no such thing as a temporary suicide."

"But it's only for the duration of the emergency! Only until the countryrecovers!"

"How do you expect it to recover?"There was no answer.

"How do you expect me to produce after I go bankrupt?"

"You won't go bankrupt. You'll always produce," said Dr. Ferrisindifferently, neither in praise nor in blame, merely in the tone of statinga fact of nature, as he would have said to another man: You'll always be abum, "You can't help it. It's in your blood. Or, to be more scientific:you're conditioned that way."

Rearden sat up: it was as if he had been struggling to find the secretcombination of a lock and felt, at those words, a faint click within, as ofthe first tumbrel falling into place.

"It's only a matter of weathering this crisis," said Mouch, "of givingpeople a reprieve, a chance to catch up."

"And then?"

"Then things will improve."

"How?"

There was no answer."What will improve them?"There was no answer."Who will improve them?"

"Christ, Mr. Rearden, people don't just stand still!" cried Holloway,"They do things, they grow, they move forward!""What people?"

Holloway waved his hand vaguely. "People," he said.

"What people? The people to whom you're going to feed the last of ReardenSteel, without getting anything in return? The people who'll go on consumingmore than they produce?"

"Conditions will change."

"Who'll change them?"

There was no answer.

"Have you anything left to loot? If you didn't see the nature of yourpolicy before—it's not possible that you don't see it now. Look around you.All those damned People's States all over the earth have been existing onlyon the handouts which you squeezed for them out of this country. But you—youhave no place left to sponge on or mooch from. No country on the face of theglobe. This was the greatest and last. You've drained it. You've milked itdry. Of all that irretrievable splendor, I'm only one remnant, the last, Whatwill you do, you and your People's Globe, after you've finished me? What areyou hoping for? What do you see ahead—except plain, stark, animalstarvation?"

They did not answer. They did not look at him. Their faces woreexpressions of stubborn resentment, as if his were the plea of a liar.

Then Lawson said softly, half in reproach, half in scorn, "Well, afterall, you businessmen have kept predicting disasters for years, you've criedcatastrophe at every progressive measure and told us that we'll perish—but wehaven't." He started a smile, but drew back from the sudden intensity ofRearden's eyes.

Rearden had felt another click in his mind, the sharper click of thesecond tumbrel connecting the circuits of the lock. He leaned forward.

"What are you counting on?" he asked; his tone had changed, it was low, ithad the steady, pressing, droning sound of a drill.

"It's only a matter of gaining time!" cried Mouch.

"There isn't any time left to gain."

"All we need is a chance!" cried Lawson.

"There are no chances left."

"It's only until we recover!" cried Holloway."There is no way to recover."

"Only until our policies begin to work!" cried Dr. Ferris."There's no way to make the irrational work.'l There was no answer."What can save you now?"

"Oh, you'll do something!" cried James Taggart.

Then—even though it was only a sentence he had heard all his life—he felta deafening crash within him, as of a steel door dropping open at the touchof the final tumbrel, the one small number completing the sum and releasingthe intricate lock, the answer uniting all the pieces, the questions and theunsolved wounds of his life.

In the moment of silence after the crash, it seemed to him that he heardFrancisco's voice, asking him quietly in the ballroom of this building, yetasking it also here and now: "Who is the guiltiest man in this room?" Heheard his own answer of the past: "I suppose—

James Taggart?" and Francisco's voice saying without reproach: "No, Mr.Rearden, it's not James Taggart,"—but here, in this room and this moment, hismind answered: "I am."

He had cursed these looters for their stubborn blindness? It was he whohad made it possible. From the first extortion he had accepted, from thefirst directive he had obeyed, he had given them cause to believe thatreality was a thing to be cheated, that one could demand the irrational andsomeone somehow would provide it. If he had accepted the Equalization ofOpportunity Bill, if he had accepted Directive 10-289, if he had accepted thelaw that those who could not equal his ability had the right to dispose ofit, that those who had not earned were to profit, but he who had was to lose,that those who could not think were to command, but he who could was to obeythem—then were they illogical in believing that they existed in an irrationaluniverse? He had made it for them, he had provided it.

Were they illogical in believing that theirs was only to wish, to wishwith no concern for the possible—and that his was to fulfill their wishes, bymeans they did not have to know or name? They, the impotent mystics,struggling to escape the responsibility of reason, had known that he, therationalist, had undertaken to serve their whims.

They had known that he had given them a blank check on reality—

his was not to ask why?—theirs was not to ask how?—let them demand that hegive them a share of his wealth, then all that he owns, then more than heowns—impossible?—no, he'll do something!

He did not know that he had leaped to his feet, that he stood staring downat James Taggart, seeing in the unbridled shapelessness of Taggart's featuresthe answer to all the devastation he had witnessed through the years of hislife.

"What's the matter, Mr. Rearden? What have I said?" Taggart was askingwith rising anxiety—but he was out of the reach of Taggart's voice.

He was seeing the progression of the years, the monstrous extortions, theimpossible demands, the inexplicable victories of evil, the preposterousplans and unintelligible goals proclaimed in volumes of muddy philosophy, thedesperate wonder of the victims who thought that some complex, malevolentwisdom was moving the powers destroying the world—and all of it had rested onone tenet behind the shifty eyes of the victors: he'll do something! . . .We'll get away with it—he'll let us—he'll do something! . . .

You businessmen kept predicting that we'd perish, but we haven't.

. . . It was true, he thought. They had not been blind to reality, he had—blind to the reality he himself had created. No, they had not perished, butwho had? Who had perished to pay for their manner of survival? Ellis Wyatt .. . Ken Danagger . . . Francisco d'Anconia.

He was reaching for his hat and coat, when he noticed that the men in theroom were trying to stop him, that their faces had a look of panic and theirvoices were crying in bewilderment: "What's the matter, Mr.

Rearden? . . . Why? . . . But why? . . . What have we said? . . .

You're not going! . . . You can't go! . . . It's too early! . . . Not yet!Oh, not yet!"

He felt as if he were seeing them from the rear window of a speedingexpress, as if they stood on the track behind him, waving their arms infutile gestures and screaming indistinguishable sounds, their figures growingsmaller in the distance, their voices fading.

One of them tried to stop him as he turned to the door. He pushed him outof his way, not roughly, but with a simple, smooth sweep of his arm, as onebrushes aside an obstructing curtain, then walked out.

Silence was his only sensation, as he sat at the wheel of his car,speeding back down the road to Philadelphia. It was the silence of immobilitywithin him, as if, possessing knowledge, he could now afford to rest, with no

further activity of soul. He felt nothing, neither anguish nor elation. Itwas as if, by an effort of years, he had climbed a mountain to gain a distantview and, having reached the top, had fallen to lie still, to rest before helooked, free to spare himself for the first time.

He was aware of the long, empty road streaming, then curving, thenstreaming straight before him, of the effortless pressure of his hands on thewheel and the screech of the tires on the curves. But he felt as if he werespeeding down a skyway suspended and coiling in empty space.

The passers-by at the factories, the bridges, the power plants along hisroad saw a sight that had once been natural among them: a trim, expensivelypowerful car driven by a confident man, with the concept of successproclaimed more loudly than by any electric sign, proclaimed by the driver'sgarments, by his expert steering, by his purposeful speed.

They watched him go past and vanish into the haze equating earth withnight.

He saw his mills rising in the darkness, as a black silhouette against abreathing glow. The glow was the color of burning gold, and "Rearden Steel"stood written across the sky in the cool, white fire of crystal.

He looked at the long silhouette, the curves of blast furnaces standinglike triumphal arches, the smokestacks rising like a solemn colonnade alongan avenue of honor in an imperial city, the bridges hanging like garlands,the cranes saluting like lances, the smoke waving slowly like flags. Thesight broke the stillness within him and he smiled in greeting. It was asmile of happiness, of love, of dedication. He had never loved his mills ashe did in that moment, for—seeing them by an act of his own vision, clearedof all but his own code of values, in a luminous reality that held nocontradictions—he was seeing the reason of his love: the mills were anachievement of his mind, devoted to his enjoyment of existence, erected in arational world to deal with rational men. If those men had vanished, if thatworld was gone, if his mills had ceased to serve his values—then the millswere only a pile of dead scrap, to be left to crumble, the sooner the better-to be left, not as an act of treason, but as an act of loyalty to theiractual meaning.

The mills were still a mile ahead when a small spurt of flame caught hissudden attention. Among all the shades of fire in the vast spread ofstructures, he could tell the abnormal and the out-of-place: this one was tooraw a shade of yellow and it was darting from a spot where no fire had reasonto be, from a structure by the gate of the main entrance.

In the next instant, he heard the dry crack of a gunshot, then threeanswering cracks in swift succession, like an angry hand slapping a suddenassailant.

Then the black mass barring the road in the distance took shape, it wasnot mere darkness and it did not recede as he came closer—it was a mobsquirming at the main gate, trying to storm the mills.

He had time to distinguish waving arms, some with clubs, some withcrowbars, some with rifles—the yellow flames of burning wood gushing from thewindow of the gatekeeper's office—the blue cracks of gunfire darting out ofthe mob and the answers spitting from the roofs of the structures—he had timeto see a human figure twisting backward and falling from the top of a ear-then he sent his wheels into a shrieking curve, turning into the darkness ofa side road.

He was going at the rate of sixty miles an hour down the ruts of anunpaved soil, toward the eastern gate of the mills—and the gate was in sightwhen the impact of tires on a gully threw the car off the road, to the edgeof a ravine where an ancient slag heap lay at the bottom. With the weight ofhis chest and elbow on the wheel, pitted against two tons of speeding metal,the curve of his body forced the curve of the car to complete its screaming

half-circle, sweeping it back onto the road and into the control of hishands. It had taken one instant, but in the next his foot went down on thebrake, tearing the engine to a stop: for in the moment when his headlightshad swept the ravine, he had glimpsed an oblong shape, darker than the grayof the weeds on the slope, and it had seemed to him that a brief white blurhad been a human hand waving for help.

Throwing off his overcoat, he went hurrying down the side of the ravine,lumps of earth giving way under his feet, he went catching at the dried coilsof brush, half-running, half-sliding toward the long black form which hecould now distinguish to be a human body. A scum of cotton was swimmingagainst the moon, he could see the white of a hand and the shape of an armlying stretched in the weeds, but the body lay still, with no sign of motion.

"Mr. Rearden ..."

It was a whisper struggling to be a cry, it was the terrible sound ofeagerness fighting against a voice that could be nothing but a moan of pain.

He did not know which came first, it felt like a single shock: his thoughtthat the voice was familiar, a ray of moonlight breaking through the cotton,the movement of falling down on his knees by the white oval of a face, andthe recognition. It was the Wet Nurse.

He felt the boy's hand clutching his with the abnormal strength of agony,while he was noticing the tortured lines of the face, the drained lips, theglazing eyes and the thin, dark trickle from a small, black hole in toowrong, too close a spot on the left side of the boy's chest.

"Mr. Rearden ... I wanted to stop them ... I wanted to save you . . ."

"What happened to you, kid?"

"They shot me, so I wouldn't talk ... I wanted to prevent"—his handfumbled toward the red glare in the sky—"what they're doing . . .

I was too late, but I've tried to . . . I've tried . . . And . . . and I'mstill able ... to talk . . . Listen, they—"

"You need help. Let's get you to a hospital and—"

"No! Wait! I ... I don't think I have much time left to me and . . . andI've got to tell you . . . Listen, that riot . . . it's staged ... onorders from Washington . . . It's not workers . . . not your workers . . .it's those new boys of theirs and . . . and a lot of goons hired on theoutside . . . Don't believe a word they'll tell you about it . . . It's aframe-up . . . it's their rotten kind of frame-up . . ."

There was a desperate intensity in the boy's face, the intensity of acrusader's battle, his voice seemed to gain a sound of life from some fuelburning in broken spurts within him—and Rearden knew that the greatestassistance he could now render was to listen.

"They . . . they've got a Steel Unification Plan ready . . . and they needan excuse for it . . . because they know that the country won't take it . . .and you won't stand for it . . . They're afraid this one's going to be toomuch for everybody . . . it's just a plan to skin you alive, that's all . . .So they want to make it look like you're starving your workers . . . and theworkers are running amuck and you're unable to control them . . . and thegovernment's got to step in for your own protection and for public safety . .. That's going to be their pitch, Mr. Rearden . . ."

Rearden was noticing the torn flesh of the boy's hands, the drying mud ofblood and dust on his palms and his clothing, gray patches of dust on kneesand stomach, scrambled with the needles of burs. In the intermittent fits ofmoonlight, he could see the trail of flattened weeds and glistening smearsgoing off into the darkness below. He dreaded to think how far the boy hadcrawled and for how long.

"They didn't want you to be here tonight, Mr. Rearden . . . They didn'twant you to see their 'People's rebellion' . . . Afterwards . . .

you know how they screw up the evidence . . . there won't be a straightstory to get anywhere . . . and they hope to fool the country . . . and you .. . that they're acting to protect you from violence . . .

Don't let them get away with it, Mr. Rearden! . . . Tell the country . . .tell the people . . . tell the newspapers . . . Tell them that I told you . .. it's under oath ... I swear it . . . that makes it legal, doesn't it? . .. doesn't it? . . . that gives you a chance?"

Rearden pressed the boy's hand in his. "Thank you, kid."

"I . . .I'm sorry I'm late, Mr. Rearden, but . . . but they didn't let mein on it till the last minute . . . till just before it started . . .

They called me in on a . . .a strategy conference . . . there was a manthere by the name of Peters . . . from the Unification Board . . . he's astooge of Tinky Holloway . . . who's a stooge of Orren Boyle . . . What theywanted from me was . . . they wanted me to sign a lot of passes ... to letsome of the goons in ... so they'd start trouble from the inside and theoutside together ... to make it look like they really were your workers . .. I refused to sign the passes."

"You did? After they'd let you in on their game?"

"But . . . but, of course, Mr. Rearden . . . Did you think I'd play thatkind of game?"

"No, kid, no, I guess not. Only—""What?"

"Only that's when you stuck your neck out."

"But I had to! ... I couldn't help them wreck the mills, could I?

. . . How long was I to keep from sticking my neck out? Till they brokeyours? . . . And what would I do with my neck, if that's how I had to keepit? . . . You . . . you understand it, don't you, Mr.

Rearden?"

"Yes. I do."

"I refused them ... I ran out of the office ... I ran to look for thesuperintendent ... to tell him everything . . . but I couldn't find him . .. and then I heard shots at the main gate and I knew it had started ... Itried to phone your home . . . the phone wires were cut ... I ran to get mycar, I wanted to reach you or a policeman or a newspaper or somebody . . .but they must have been following me . . . that's when they shot me ... inthe parking lot . . .

from behind . . . all I remember is falling and . . . and then, when Iopened my eyes, they had dumped me here ... on the slag heap ..."

"On the slag heap?" said Rearden slowly, knowing that the heap was ahundred feet below.

The boy nodded, pointing vaguely down into the darkness. "Yeah . . . downthere . . . And then I ... I started crawling . . .

crawling up ... I wanted ... I wanted to last till I told somebodywho'd tell you." The pain-twisted lines of his face smoothed suddenly into asmile; his voice had the sound of a lifetime's triumph as he added, "I have."Then he jerked his head up and asked, in the tone of a child's astonishmentat a sudden discovery, "Mr. Rearden, is this how it feels to ... to wantsomething very much . . . very desperately much . . . and to make it?"

"Yes, kid, that's how it feels." The boy's head dropped back againstRearden's arm, the eyes closing, the mouth relaxing, as if to hold a moment'sprofound contentment. "But you can't stop there. You're not through. You'vegot to hang on till I get you to a doctor and—" He was lifting the boycautiously, but a convulsion of pain ran through the boy's face, his mouthtwisting to stop a cry—and Rearden had to lower him gently back to theground.

The boy shook his head with a glance that was almost apology. "I won'tmake it, Mr. Rearden ... No use fooling myself ... I know I'm through."

Then, as if by some dim recoil against self-pity, he added, reciting amemorized lesson, his voice a desperate attempt at his old, cynical,intellectual tone, "What does it matter, Mr. Rearden? . . . Man is only acollection of . . . conditioned chemicals . . . and a man's dying doesn'tmake . . . any more difference than an animal's."

"You know better than that."

"Yes," he whispered. "Yes, I guess I do."

His eyes wandered over the vast darkness, then rose to Rearden's face; theeyes were helpless, longing, childishly bewildered. "I know . . . it's crap,all those things they taught us . . . all of it, everything they said . . .about living or ... or dying . . . Dying ... it wouldn't make anydifference to chemicals, but—" he stopped, and all of his desperate protestwas only in the intensity of his voice dropping lower to say, "—but it does,to me . . . And . . . and, I guess, it makes a difference to an animal, too .. . But they said there are no values . . . only social customs ... Novalues!" His hand clutched blindly at the hole in his chest, as if trying tohold that which he was losing. "No . . . values . . ."

Then his eyes opened wider, with the sudden calm of full frankness.

"I'd like to live, Mr. Rearden. God, how I'd like to!" His voice waspassionately quiet. "Not because I'm dying . . . but because I've justdiscovered it tonight, what it means, really to be alive . . . And . . . it'sfunny ... do you know when [ discovered it? ... In the office . . .

when I stuck my neck out . . . when I told the bastards to go to hell . .. There's . . . there's so many things I wish I'd known sooner . . . But . .. well, it's no use crying over spilled milk." He saw Rearden's involuntaryglance at the flattened trail below and added, "Over spilled anything, Mr.Rearden."

"Listen, kid," said Rearden sternly, "I want you to do me a favor.""Now, Mr. Rearden?""Yes. Now."

"Why, of course, Mr. Rearden . . . if I can."

"You've done me a big favor tonight, but I want you to do a still biggerone. You've done a great job, climbing out of that slag heap.

Now will you try for something still harder? You were willing to die tosave my mills. Will you try to live for me?"

"For you, Mr. Rearden?"

"For me. Because I'm asking you to. Because I want you to. Because westill have a great distance to climb together, you and I."

"Does it . . . does it make a difference to you, Mr. Rearden?"

"It does. Will you make up your mind that you want to live—just as you diddown there on the slag heap? That you want to last and live? Will you fightfor it? You wanted to fight my battle. Will you fight this one with me, asour first?"

He felt the clutching of the boy's hand; it conveyed the violent eagernessof the answer; the voice was only a whisper: "I'll try, Mr.Rearden."

"Now help me to get you to a doctor. Just relax, take it easy and let melift you."

"Yes, Mr. Rearden." With the jerk of a sudden effort, the boy pulledhimself up to lean on an elbow."Take it easy, Tony."

He saw a sudden flicker in the boy's face, an attempt at his old, bright,impudent grin. "Not 'Non-Absolute' any more?"

"No, not any more. You're a full absolute now, and you know it."

"Yes. I know several of them, now. There's one"—he pointed at the wound inhis chest—"that's an absolute, isn't it? And"—he went on speaking whileRearden was lifting him from the ground by imperceptible seconds and inches,

speaking as if the trembling intensity of his words were serving as ananesthetic against the pain—"and men can't live ... if rotten bastards . .. like the ones in Washington . . . get away with things like . . . like theone they're doing tonight ... if everything becomes a stinking fake . . .and nothing is real . . . and nobody is anybody . . . men can't live that way

that's an absolute, isn't it?""Yes, Tony, that's an absolute."

Rearden rose to his feet by a long, cautious effort; he saw the torturedspasm of the boy's features, as he settled him slowly against his chest, likea baby held tight in his arms—but the spasm twisted into another echo of theimpudent grin, and the boy asked, "Who's the Wet Nurse now?"

"I guess I am."

He took the first steps up the slant of crumbling soil, his body tensed tothe task of shock absorber for his fragile burden, to the task of maintaininga steady progression where there was no foothold to find.

The boy's head dropped on Rearden's shoulder, hesitantly, almost as ifthis were a presumption. Rearden bent down and pressed his lips to the dust-streaked forehead.

The boy jerked back, raising his head with a shock of incredulous,indignant astonishment. "Do you know what you did?" he whispered, as ifunable to believe that it was meant for him.

"Put your head down," said Rearden, "and I'll do it again."

The boy's head dropped and Rearden kissed his forehead; it was like afather's recognition granted to a son's battle.

The boy lay still, his face hidden, his hands clutching Rearden'sshoulders. Then, with no hint of sound, with only the sudden beat of faint,spaced, rhythmic shudders to show it, Rearden knew that the boy was crying-crying in surrender, in admission of all the things which he could not putinto the words he had never found.

Rearden went on moving slowly upward, step by groping step, fighting forfirmness of motion against the weeds, the drifts of dust, the chunks of scrapmetal, the refuse of a distant age. He went on, toward the line where the redglow of his mills marked the edge of the pit above him, his movement a fiercestruggle that had to take the form of a gentle, unhurried flow.

He heard no sobs, but he felt the rhythmic shudders, and, through thecloth of his shirt, in place of tears, he felt the small, warm, liquid spurtsflung from the wound by the shudders. He knew that the tight pressure of hisarms was the only answer which the boy was now able to hear and understand—and he held the trembling body as if the strength of his arms could transfusesome part of his living power into the arteries beating ever fainter againsthim.

Then the sobbing stopped and the boy raised his head. His face seemedthinner and paler, but the eyes were lustrous, and he looked up at Rearden,straining for the strength to speak.

"Mr. Rearden ... I ... I liked you very much."

"I know it."

The boy's features had no power to form a smile, but it was a smile thatspoke in his glance, as he looked at Rearden's face—as he looked at thatwhich he had not known he had been seeking through the brief span of hislife, seeking as the image of that which he had not known to be his values.

Then his head fell back, and there was no convulsion in his face, only hismouth relaxing to a shape of serenity—but there was a brief stab ofconvulsion in his body, like a last cry of protest—and Rearden went onslowly, not altering his pace, even though he knew that no caution wasnecessary any longer because what he was carrying in his arms was now thatwhich had been the boy's teachers' idea of man—

a collection of chemicals.

He walked, as if this were his form of last tribute and funeral processionfor the young life that had ended in his arms. He felt an anger too intenseto identify except as a pressure within him: it was a desire to kill.

The desire was not directed at the unknown thug who had sent a bulletthrough the boy's body, or at the looting bureaucrats who had hired the thugto do it, but at the boy's teachers who had delivered him, disarmed, to thethug's gun—at the soft, safe assassins of college classrooms who, incompetentto answer the queries of a quest for reason, took pleasure in crippling theyoung minds entrusted to their care.

Somewhere, he thought, there was this boy's mother, who had trembled withprotective concern over his groping steps, while teaching him to walk, whohad measured his baby formulas with a jeweler's caution, who had obeyed witha zealot's fervor the latest words of science on his diet and hygiene,protecting his unhardened body from germs—then had sent him to be turned intoa tortured neurotic by the men who taught him that he had no mind and mustnever attempt to think. Had she fed him tainted refuse, he thought, had shemixed poison into his food, it would have been more kind and less fatal.

He thought of all the living species that train their young in the art ofsurvival, the cats who teach their kittens to hunt, the birds who spend suchstrident effort on teaching their fledglings to fly—yet man, whose tool ofsurvival is the mind, does not merely fail to teach <a child to think, butdevotes the child's education to the purpose of destroying his brain, ofconvincing him that thought is futile and evil, before he has started tothink.

From the first catch-phrases flung at a child to the last, it is like aseries of shocks to freeze his motor, to undercut the power of hisconsciousness. "Don't ask so many questions, children should be seen and notheard!"—"Who are you to think? It's so, because I say so!"—"Don't argue,obey!"—"Don't try to understand, believe!"—"Don't rebel, adjust!"—"Don'tstand out, belong!"—"Don't struggle, compromise!"

—"Your heart is more important than your mind!"—"Who are you to know? Yourparents know best!"—"Who are you to know? Society knows best!"—"Who are youto know? The bureaucrats know best!"—

"Who are you to object? All values are relative!"—"Who are you to want toescape a thug's bullet? That's only a personal prejudice!"

Men would shudder, he thought, if they saw a mother bird plucking thefeathers from the wings of her young, then pushing him out of the nest tostruggle for survival—yet that was what they did to their children.

Armed with nothing but meaningless phrases, this boy had been thrown tofight for existence, he had hobbled and groped through a brief, doomedeffort, he had screamed his indignant, bewildered protest —and had perishedin his first attempt to soar on his mangled wings.

But a different breed of teachers had once existed, he thought, and hadreared the men who created this country; he thought that mothers should setout on their knees to look for men like Hugh Akston, to find them and begthem to return.

He went through the gate of the mills, barely noticing the guards who lethim enter, who stared at his face and his burden; he did not pause to listento their words, as they pointed to the fighting in the distance; he went onwalking slowly toward the wedge of light which was the open door of thehospital building.

He stepped into a lighted room full of men, bloody bandages and the odorof antiseptics; he deposited his burden on a bench, with no word ofexplanation to anyone, and walked out, not glancing behind him.

He walked in the direction of the front gate, toward the glare of fire andthe bursts of guns. He saw, once in a while, a few figures running through

the cracks between structures or darting behind black corners, pursued bygroups of guards and workers; he was astonished to notice that his workerswere well armed. They seemed to have subdued the hoodlums inside the mills,and only the siege at the front gate remained to be beaten. He saw a loutscurrying across a patch of lamplight, swinging a length of pipe at a wall ofglass panes, battering them down with an animal relish, dancing like agorilla to the sound of crashing glass, until three husky human figuresdescended upon him, carrying him writhing to the ground.

The siege of the gate appeared to be ebbing, as if the spine of the mobhad been broken. He heard the distant screeches of their cries—

but the shots from the road were growing rarer, the fire set to thegatekeeper's office was put out, there were armed men on the ledges and atwindows, posted in well-planned defense.

On the roof of a structure above the gate, he saw, as he came closer, theslim silhouette of a man who held a gun in each hand and, from behind theprotection of a chimney, kept firing at intervals down into the mob, firingswiftly and, it seemed, in two directions at once, like a sentinel protectingthe approaches to the gate. The confident skill of his movements, his mannerof firing, with no time wasted to take aim, but with the kind of casualabruptness that never misses a target, made him look like a hero of Westernlegend—and Rearden watched him with detached, impersonal pleasure, as if thebattle of the mills were not his any longer, but he could still enjoy thesight of the competence and certainty with which men of that distant age hadonce combatted evil.

The beam of a roving searchlight struck Rearden's face, and when the lightswept past he saw the man on the roof leaning down, as if peering in hisdirection. The man waved to someone to replace him, then vanished abruptlyfrom his post.

Rearden hurried on through the short stretch of darkness ahead —but then,from the side, from the crack of an alley, he heard a drunken voice yell,"There he is!" and whirled to see two beefy figures advancing upon him. Hesaw a leering, mindless face with a mouth hung loose in a joyless chuckle,and a club in a rising fist—he heard the sound of running steps approachingfrom another direction, he attempted to turn his head, then the club crasheddown on his skull from behind—and in the moment of splitting darkness, whenhe wavered, refusing to believe it, then felt himself going down, he felt astrong, protective arm seizing him and breaking his fall, he heard a gunexploding an inch above his ear, then another explosion from the same gun inthe same second, but it seemed faint and distant, as if he had fallen down ashaft.

His first awareness, when he opened his eyes, was a sense of profoundserenity. Then he saw that he was lying on a couch in a modern, sternlygracious room—then, he realized that it was his office and that the two menstanding beside him were the mills' doctor and the superintendent. He felt adistant pain in his head, which would have been violent had he cared tonotice it, and he felt a strip of tape across his hair, on the side of hishead. The sense of serenity was the knowledge that he was free.

The meaning of his bandage and the meaning of his office were not to beaccepted or to exist, together—it was not a combination for men to live with—this was not his battle any longer, nor his job, nor his business.

"I think I'll be all right, Doctor," he said, raising his head.

"Yes, Mr. Rearden, fortunately." The doctor was looking at him as if stillunable to believe that this had happened to Hank Rearden inside his ownmills; the doctor's voice was tense with angry loyalty and indignation."Nothing serious, just a scalp wound and a slight concussion.

But you must take it easy and allow yourself to rest."

"I will," said Rearden firmly.

"It's all over," said the superintendent, waving at the mills beyond thewindow. "We've got the bastards beaten and on the run. You don't have toworry, Mr. Rearden. It's all over."

"It is," said Rearden. "There must be a lot of work left for you to do,Doctor. "

"Oh yes! I never thought I'd live to see the day when—""I know. Go ahead, take care of it. I'll be all right.""Yes, Mr. Rearden."

"I'll take care of the place," said the superintendent, as the doctorhurried out. "Everything's under control, Mr. Rearden. But it was thedirtiest—"

"I know," said Rearden. "Who was it that saved my life? Somebody grabbedme as I fell, and fired at the thugs."

"Did he! Straight at their faces. Blew their heads off. That was that newfurnace foreman of ours. Been here two months. Best man I've ever had. He'sthe one who got wise to what the gravy boys were planning and warned me, thisafternoon. Told me to arm our men, as many as we could. We got no help fromthe police or the state troopers, they dodged all over the place with thefanciest delays and excuses I ever heard of, it was all fixed in advance, thegoons weren't expecting any armed resistance. It was that furnace foreman-Frank Adams is his name—who organized our defense, ran the whole battle, andstood on a roof, picking off the scum that came too close to the gate. Boy,what a marksman! I shudder to think how many of our lives he saved tonight.

Those bastards were out for blood, Mr. Rearden."

"I'd like to see him."

"He's waiting somewhere outside. It's he who brought you here, and heasked permission to speak to you, when possible."

"Send him in. Then go back out there, take charge, finish the job.""Is there anything else I can do for you, Mr. Rearden?""No, nothing else."

He lay still, alone in the silence of his office. He knew that the meaningof his mills had ceased to exist, and the fullness of the knowledge left noroom for the pain of regretting an illusion. He had seen, in a final image,the soul and essence of his enemies: the mindless face of the thug with theclub. It was not the face itself that made him draw back in horror, but theprofessors, the philosophers, the moralists, the mystics who had releasedthat face upon the world.

He felt a peculiar cleanliness. It was made of pride and of love for thisearth, this earth which was his, not theirs. It was the feeling which hadmoved him through his life, the feeling which some among men know in theiryouth, then betray, but which he had never betrayed and had carried withinhim as a battered, attacked, unidentified, but living motor—the feeling whichhe could now experience in its full, uncontested purity: the sense of his ownsuperlative value and the superlative value of his life. It was the finalcertainty that his life was his, to be lived with no bondage to evil, andthat that bondage had never been necessary. It was the radiant serenity ofknowing that he was free of fear, of pain, of guilt.

If it's true, he thought, that there are avengers who are working for thedeliverance of men like me, let them see me now, let them tell me theirsecret, let them claim me, let them—"Come in!" he said aloud, in answer tothe knock on his door.

The door opened and he lay still. The man standing on the threshold, withdisheveled hair, a soot-streaked face and furnace-smudged arms, dressed inscorched overalls and bloodstained shirt, standing as if he wore a capewaving behind him in the wind, was Francisco d'Anconia.

It seemed to Rearden that his consciousness shot forward ahead of hisbody, it was his body that refused to move, stunned by shock, while his mind

was laughing, telling him that this was the most natural, the most-to-have-been-expected event in the world.

Francisco smiled, a smile of greeting to a childhood friend on a summermorning, as if nothing else had ever been possible between them—

and Rearden found himself smiling in answer, some part of him feeling anincredulous wonder, yet knowing that it was irresistibly right.

"You've been torturing yourself for months," said Francisco, approachinghim, "wondering what words you'd use to ask my forgiveness and whether youhad the right to ask it, if you ever saw me again —but now you see that itisn't necessary, that there's nothing to ask or to forgive."

"Yes," said Rearden, the word coming as an astonished whisper, but by thetime he finished his sentence he knew that this was the greatest tribute hecould offer, "yes, I know it."

Francisco sat down on the couch beside him, and slowly moved his hand overRearden's forehead. It was like a healing touch that closed the past.

"There's only one thing I want to tell you," said Rearden. "I want you tohear it from me: you kept your oath, you were my friend."

"I knew that you knew it. You knew it from the first. You knew it, nomatter what you thought of my actions. You slapped me because you could notforce yourself to doubt it."

"That . . ." whispered Rearden, staring at him, "that was the thing I hadno right to tell you ... no right to claim as my excuse . . ."

"Didn't you suppose I'd understand it?"

"I wanted to find you ... I had no right to look for you . . . And allthat time, you were—" He pointed at Francisco's clothes, then his handdropped helplessly and he closed his eyes.

"I was your furnace foreman," said Francisco, grinning. "I didn't thinkyou'd mind that. You offered me the job yourself."

"You've been here, as my bodyguard, for two months?"

"Yes."

"You've been here, ever since—" He stopped.

"That's right. On the morning of the day when you were reading my farewellmessage over the roofs of New York, I was reporting here for my first shiftas your furnace foreman."

"Tell me," said Rearden slowly, "that night, at James Taggart's wedding,when you said that you were after your greatest conquest . . .

you meant me, didn't you?"

"Of course."

Francisco drew himself up a little, as if for a solemn task, his faceearnest, the smile remaining only in his eyes. "I have a great deal to tellyou, " he said, "But first, will you repeat a word you once offered me and I .. . I had to reject, because I knew that I was not free to accept it?"

Rearden smiled. "What word, Francisco?"

Francisco inclined his head in acceptance, and answered, "Thank you,Hank." Then he raised his head. "Now I'll tell you the things I had come tosay, but did not finish, that night when I came here for the first time. Ithink you're ready to hear it,"

"I am."

The glare of steel being poured from a furnace shot to the sky beyond thewindow. A red glow went sweeping slowly over the walls of the office, overthe empty desk, over Rearden's face, as if in salute and farewell.

CHAPTER VIITHIS IS JOHN GALT SPEAKING

The doorbell was ringing like an alarm, In a long, demanding scream,broken by the impatient stabs of someone's frantic finger.

Leaping out of bed, Dagny noticed the cold, pale sunlight of late morningand a clock on a distant spire marking the hour of ten. She had worked at theoffice till four A.M. and had left word not to expect her till noon.

The white face ungroomed by panic, that confronted her when she threw thedoor open, was James Taggart.

"He's gone!" he cried.

"Who?"

"Hank Rearden! He's gone, quit, vanished, disappeared!"

She stood still for a moment, holding the belt of the dressing gown shehad been tying; then, as the full knowledge reached her, her hands jerked thebelt tight—as if snapping her body in two at the waistline-while she burst out laughing. It was a sound of triumph.

He stared at her in bewilderment. "What's the matter with you?" he gasped."Haven't you understood?"

"Come in, Jim," she said, turning contemptuously, walking into the livingroom. "Oh yes, I've understood."

"He's quit! Gone! Gone like all the others! Left his mills, his bankaccounts, his property, everything! Just vanished! Took some clothing andwhatever he had in the safe in his apartment—they found a safe left open inhis bedroom, open and empty—that's all! No word, no note, no explanation!They called me from Washington, but it's all over town! The news, I mean, thestory! They can't keep it quiet!

They've tried to, but . . . Nobody knows how it got out, but it wentthrough the mills like one of those furnace break-outs, the word that he'dgone, and then . . . before anyone could stop it, a whole bunch of themvanished! The superintendent, the chief metallurgist, the chief engineer,Rearden's secretary, even the hospital doctor! And God knows how many others!Deserting, the bastards! Deserting us, in spite of all the penalties we'veset up! He's quit and the rest are quitting and those mills are just leftthere, standing still! Do you understand what that means?"

"Do you?" she asked.

He had thrown his story at her, sentence by sentence, as if trying toknock the smile off her face, an odd, unmoving smile of bitterness andtriumph; he had failed. "It's a national catastrophe! What's the matter withyou? Don't you see that it's a fatal blow? It will break the last of thecountry's morale and economy! We can't let him vanish! You've got to bringhim back!"

Her smile disappeared.

"You can!" he cried. "You're the only one who can! He's your lover, isn'the? . . . Oh, don't look like that! It's no time for squeamishness!

It's no time for anything except that we've got to have him! You must knowwhere he is! You can find him! You must reach him and bring him back!"

The way she now looked at him was worse than her smile—she looked as ifshe were seeing him naked and would not endure the sight much longer. "Ican't bring him back," she said, not raising her voice.

"And I wouldn't, if I could. Now get out of here."

"But the national catastrophe—"

"Get out."

She did not notice his exit. She stood alone in the middle of her livingroom, her head dropping, her shoulders sagging, while she was smiling, asmile of pain, of tenderness, of greeting to Hank Rearden. She wondered dimly

why she should feel so glad that he had found liberation, so certain that hewas right, and yet refuse herself the same deliverance. Two sentences werebeating in her mind; one was the triumphant sweep of: He's free, he's out oftheir reach!—the other was like a prayer of dedication: There's still achance to win, but let me be the only victim. . . .

It was strange—she thought, in the days that followed, looking at the menaround her—that catastrophe had made them aware of Hank Rearden with anintensity that his achievements had not aroused, as if the paths of theirconsciousness were open to disaster, but not to value.

Some spoke of him in shrill curses—others whispered, with a look of guiltand terror, as if a nameless retribution were now to descend upon them—sometried, with hysterical evasiveness, to act as if nothing had happened.

The newspapers, like puppets on tangled strings, were shouting with thesame belligerence and on the same dates: "It is social treason to ascribe toomuch importance to Hank Rearden's desertion and to undermine public morale bythe old-fashioned belief that an individual can be of any significance tosociety." "It is social treason to spread rumors about the disappearance ofHank Rearden. Mr. Rearden has not disappeared, he is in his office, runninghis mills, as usual, and there has been no trouble at Rearden Steel, except aminor disturbance, a private scuffle among some workers." "It is socialtreason to cast an unpatriotic light upon the tragic loss of Hank Rearden.Mr. Rearden has not deserted, he was killed in an automobile accident on hisway to work, and his grief-stricken family has insisted on a privatefuneral."

It was strange, she thought, to obtain news by means of nothing butdenials, as if existence had ceased, facts had vanished and only the franticnegatives uttered by officials and columnists gave any clue to the realitythey were denying. "It is not true that the Miller Steel Foundry of NewJersey has gone out of business." "It is not true that the Jansen MotorCompany of Michigan has closed its doors." "It is a vicious, anti-social liethat manufacturers of steel products are collapsing under the threat of asteel shortage. There is no reason to expect a steel shortage." "It is aslanderous, unfounded rumor that a Steel Unification Plan had been in themaking and that it had been favored by Mr.

Orren Boyle. Mr. Boyle's attorney has issued an emphatic denial and hasassured the press that Mr. Boyle is now vehemently opposed to any such plan.Mr. Boyle, at the moment, is suffering from a nervous breakdown."

But some news could be witnessed in the streets of New York, in the cold,dank twilight of autumn evenings: a crowd gathered in front of a hardwarestore, where the owner had thrown the doors open, inviting people to helpthemselves to the last of his meager stock, while he laughed in shriekingsobs and went smashing his plate-glass windows—

a crowd gathered at the door of a run-down apartment house, where a policeambulance stood waiting, while the bodies of a man, his wife and their threechildren were being removed from a gas-filled room; the man had been a smallmanufacturer of steel castings.

If they see Hank Rearden's value now—she thought—why didn't they see itsooner? Why hadn't they averted their own doom and spared him his years ofthankless torture? She found no answer.

In the silence of sleepless nights, she thought that Hank Rearden and shehad now changed places: he was in Atlantis and she was locked out by a screenof light—he was, perhaps, calling to her as she had called to his strugglingairplane, but no signal could reach her through that screen.

Yet the screen split open for one brief break—for the length of a lettershe received a week after he vanished. The envelope bore no return address,only the postmark of some hamlet in Colorado. The letter contained twosentences: I have met him. I don't blame you.

H.R.

She sat still for a long time, looking at the letter, as if unable to moveor to feel. She felt nothing, she thought, then noticed that her shoulderswere trembling in a faint, continuous shudder, then grasped that the tearingviolence within her was made of an exultant tribute, of gratitude and ofdespair—her tribute to the victory that the meeting of these two men implied,the final victory of both—her gratitude that those in Atlantis still regardedher as one of them and had granted her the exception of receiving a message—the despair of the knowledge that her blankness was a struggle not to hearthe questions she was now hearing. Had Gait abandoned her? Had he gone to thevalley to meet his greatest conquest? Would he come back? Had he given herup? The unendurable was not that these questions had no answer, but that theanswer was so simply, so easily within her reach and that she had no right totake a step to reach it.

She had made no attempt to see him. Every morning, for a month, onentering her office, she had been conscious, not of the room around her, butof the tunnels below, under the floors of the building—and she had worked,feeling as if some marginal part of her brain was computing figures, readingreports, making decisions in a rush of lifeless activity, while her livingmind was inactive and still, frozen in contemplation, forbidden to movebeyond the sentence: He's down there. The only inquiry she had permittedherself had been a glance at the payroll list of the Terminal workers. Shehad seen the name: Gait, John. The list had carried it, openly, for overtwelve years. She had seen an address next to the name—and, for a month, hadstruggled to forget it.

It had seemed hard to live through that month—yet now, as she looked atthe letter, the thought that Gait had gone was still harder to bear. Even thestruggle of resisting his proximity had been a link to him, a price to pay, avictory achieved in his name. Now there was nothing, except a question thatwas not to be asked. His presence in the tunnels had been her motor throughthose days—just as his presence in the city had been her motor through themonths of that summer—just as his presence somewhere in the world had beenher motor through the years before she ever heard his name. Now she felt asif her motor, too, had stopped.

She went on, with the bright, pure glitter of a five-dollar gold piece,which she kept in her pocket, as her last drop of fuel. She went on,protected from the world around her by a last armor: indifference.

The newspapers did not mention the outbreaks of violence that had begun toburst across the country—but she watched them through the reports of trainconductors about bullet-riddled cars, dismantled tracks, attacked trains,besieged stations, in. Nebraska, in Oregon, in Texas, in Montana—the futile,doomed outbreaks, prompted by nothing but despair, ending in nothing butdestruction. Some were the explosions of local gangs; some spread wider.There were districts that rose in blind rebellion, arrested the localofficials, expelled the agents of Washington, killed the tax collectors—then,announcing their secession from the country, went on to the final extreme ofthe very evil that had destroyed them, as if fighting murder with suicide:went on to seize all property within their reach, to declare communitybondage of all to all, and to perish within a week, their meager lootconsumed, in the bloody hatred of all for all, in the chaos of no rule savethat of the gun, to perish under the lethargic thrust of a few worn soldierssent out from Washington to bring order to the ruins.

The newspapers did not mention it. The editorials went on speaking ofself-denial as the road to future progress, of self-sacrifice as the moralimperative, of greed as the enemy, of love as the solution—their threadbarephrases as sickeningly sweet as the odor of ether in a hospital.

Rumors went spreading through the country in whispers of cynical terror-yet people read the newspapers and acted as if they believed what they read,each competing with the others on who would keep most blindly silent, eachpretending that he did not know what he knew, each striving to believe thatthe unnamed was the unreal. It was as if a volcano were cracking open, yetthe people at the foot of the mountain ignored the sudden fissures, the blackfumes, the boiling trickles, and went on believing that their only danger wasto acknowledge the reality of these signs.

"Listen to Mr. Thompson's report on the world crisis, November 22!"

It was the first acknowledgment of the unacknowledged. The announcementsbegan to appear a week in advance and went ringing across the country. "Mr.Thompson will give the people a report on the world crisis! Listen to Mr.Thompson on every radio station and television channel at 8 P.M., on November22 ! "

First, the front pages of the newspapers and the shouts of the radiovoices had explained it: "To counteract the fears and rumors spread by theenemies of the people, Mr. Thompson will address the country on November 22and will give us a full report on the state of the world in this solemnmoment of global crisis. Mr. Thompson will put an end to those sinisterforces whose purpose is to keep us in terror and despair. He will bring lightinto the darkness of the world and will show us the way out of our tragicproblems—a stern way, as befits the gravity of this hour, but a way of glory,as granted by the rebirth of light.

Mr. Thompson's address will be carried by every radio station in thiscountry and in all countries throughout the world, wherever radio waves maystill be heard."

Then the chorus broke loose and went growing day by day. "Listen to Mr.Thompson on November 22!" said daily headlines. "Don't forget Mr. Thompson onNovember 22!" cried radio stations at the end of every program. "Mr. Thompsonwill tell you the truth!" said placards in subways and buses—then posters onthe walls of buildings —then billboards on deserted highways.

"Don't despair! Listen to Mr. Thompson!" said pennants on government cars,"Don't give up! Listen to Mr. Thompson!" said banners in offices and shops."Have faith! Listen to Mr. Thompson!" said voices in churches. "Mr. Thompsonwill give you the answer!" wrote army airplanes across the sky, the lettersdissolving in space, and only the last two words remaining by the time thesentence was completed.

Public loud-speakers were built in the squares of New York for the day ofthe speech, and came to rasping life once an hour, in time with the ringingof distant clocks, to send over the worn rattle of the traffic, over theheads of the shabby crowds, the sonorous, mechanical cry of an alarm-tonedvoice: "Listen to Mr. Thompson's report on the world crisis, November 22!"—acry rolling through the frosted air and vanishing among the foggy roof tops,under the blank page of a calendar that bore no date.

On the afternoon of November 22, James Taggart told Dagny that Mr.Thompson wished to meet her for a conference before the broadcast.

"In Washington?" she asked incredulously, glancing at her watch.

"Well, I must say that you haven't been reading the newspapers or keepingtrack of important events. Don't you know that Mr. Thompson is to broadcastfrom New York? He has come here to confer with the leaders of industry, aswell as of labor, science, the professions, and the best of the country'sleadership in general. He has requested that I bring you to the conference."

"Where is it to be held?"

"At the broadcasting studio."

"They don't expect me to speak on the air in support of their policies, dothey?"

"Don't worry, they wouldn't let you near a microphone! They just want tohear your opinion, and you can't refuse, not in a national emergency, notwhen it's an invitation from Mr. Thompson in person!" He spoke impatiently,avoiding her eyes.

"When is that conference to be held?"

"At seven-thirty."

"Not much time to give to a conference about a national emergency, is it?"

"Mr. Thompson is a very busy man. Now please don't argue, don't startbeing difficult, I don't see what you're—"

"All right," she said indifferently, "I'll come," and added, prompted bythe kind of feeling that would have made her reluctant to venture without awitness into a conference of gangsters, "but I'll bring Eddie Willers alongwith me,"

He frowned, considering it for a moment, with a look of annoyance morethan anxiety. "Oh, all right, if you wish," he snapped, shrugging.

She came to the broadcasting studio with James Taggart as a policeman atone side of her and Eddie Willers as a bodyguard at the other.

Taggart's face was resentful and tense, Eddie's—resigned, yet wonderingand curious. A stage set of pasteboard walls had been erected in a corner ofthe vast, dim space, representing a stiffly traditional suggestion of a crossbetween a stately drawing room and a modest study. A semicircle of emptyarmchairs filled the set, suggesting a grouping from a family album, withmicrophones dangling like bait at the end of long poles extended for fishingamong the chairs.

The best leadership of the country, that stood about in nervous clusters,had the look of a remnant sale in a bankrupt store: she saw Wesley Mouch,Eugene Lawson, Chick Morrison, Tinky Holloway, Dr.

Floyd Ferris, Dr. Simon Pritchett, Ma Chalmers, Fred Kinnan, and a seedyhandful of businessmen among whom the half-scared, half-flattered figure ofMr. Mowen of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company was, incredibly,intended to represent an industrial tycoon.

But the figure that gave her an instant's shock was Dr. Robert Stadler.She had not known that a face could age so greatly within the brief space ofone year: the look of timeless energy, of boyish eagerness, was gone, andnothing remained of the face except the lines of contemptuous bitterness. Hestood alone, apart from the others, and she saw the moment when his eyes sawher enter; he looked like a man in a whorehouse who had accepted the natureof his surroundings until suddenly caught there by his wife: it was a look ofguilt in the process of becoming hatred. Then she saw Robert Stadler, thescientist, turn away as if he had not seen her—as if his refusal to see couldwipe a fact out of existence.

Mr. Thompson was pacing among the groups, snapping at random bystanders,in the restless manner of a man of action who feels contempt for the duty ofmaking speeches. He was clutching a sheaf of typewritten pages, as if it werea bundle of old clothing about to be discarded.

James Taggart caught him in mid-step, to say uncertainly and loudly, "Mr.Thompson, may I present my sister, Miss Dagny Taggart?"

"So nice of you to come, Miss Taggart," said Mr. Thompson, shaking herhand as if she were another voter from back home whose name he had neverheard before; then he marched briskly off.

"Where's the conference, Jim?" she asked, and glanced at the clock: it wasa huge white dial with a black hand slicing the minutes, like a knife movingtoward the hour of eight.

"I can't help it! I don't run this show!" he snapped.

Eddie Willers glanced at her with a look of bitterly patient astonishment,and stepped closer to her side.

A radio receiver was playing a program of military marches broadcast fromanother studio, half-drowning the fragments of nervous voices, of hastilyaimless steps, of screeching machinery being pulled to focus upon thedrawing-room set.

"Stay tuned to hear Mr. Thompson's report on the world crisis at eightP.M.!" cried the martial voice of an announcer, from the radio receiver—whenthe hand on the dial reached the hour of 7:45, "Step on it, boys, step onit!" snapped Mr. Thompson, while the radio burst into another march.

It was 7:50 when Chick Morrison, the Morale Conditioner, who seemed to bein charge, cried, "AH right, boys and girls, all right, let's take ourplaces!" waving a bunch of notepaper, like a baton, toward the light-floodedcircle of armchairs.

Mr. Thompson thudded down upon the central chair, in the manner ofgrabbing a vacant seat in a subway.

Chick Morrison's assistants were herding the crowd toward the circle oflight.

"A happy family," Chick Morrison explained, "the country must see us as abig, united, happy—What's the matter with that thing?"

The radio music had gone off abruptly, choking on an odd little gasp ofstatic, cut in the middle of a ringing phrase. It was 7:51. He shrugged andwent on: "—happy family. Hurry up, boys. Take close-ups of Mr. Thompson,first."

The hand of the clock went slicing off the minutes, while pressphotographers clicked their cameras at Mr. Thompson's" sourly impatient face.

"Mr. Thompson will sit between science and industry!" Chick Morrisonannounced. "Dr. Stadler, please—the chair on Mr. Thompson's left. MissTaggart—this way, please—on Mr. Thompson's right."

Dr. Stadler obeyed. She did not move.

"It's not just for the press, it's for the television audiences," ChickMorrison explained to her, in the tone of an inducement.

She made a step forward. "I will not take part in this program," she saidevenly, addressing Mr. Thompson.

"You won't?" he asked blankly, with the kind of look he would have worn ifone of the flower vases had suddenly refused to perform its part.

"Dagny, for Christ's sake!" cried James Taggart in panic.

"What's the matter with her?" asked Mr. Thompson.

"But, Miss Taggart! Why?" cried Chick Morrison.

"You all know why," she said to the faces around her. "You should haveknown better than to try that again,"

"Miss Taggart!" yelled Chick Morrison, as she turned to go. "It's anational emer—"

Then a man came rushing toward Mr. Thompson, and she stopped, as dideveryone else—and the look on the man's face swept the crowd into an abruptlytotal silence. He was the station's chief engineer, and it was odd to see alook of primitive terror struggling against his remnant of civilized control.

"Mr. Thompson," he said, "we ... we might have to delay the broadcast."

"What?" cried Mr. Thompson.

The hand of the dial stood at 7:58.

"We're trying to fix it, Mr. Thompson, we're trying to find out what it is. . . but we might not be on time and—"

"What are you talking about? What happened?""We're trying to locate the—""What happened?"

. "I don't know! But . . . We . . we can't get on the air, Mr.Thompson."

There was a moment of silence, then Mr. Thompson asked, his voiceunnaturally low, "Are you crazy?"

"I must be. I wish I were. I can't make it out. The station is dead.""Mechanical trouble?" yelled Mr. Thompson, leaping to his feet."Mechanical trouble, God damn you, at a time like this? If that's how yourun this station—"

The chief engineer shook his head slowly, in the manner of an adult who isreluctant to frighten a child. "It's not this station, Mr. Thompson," he saidsoftly. "It's every station in the country, as far as we've been able tocheck. And there is no mechanical trouble. Neither here nor elsewhere. Theequipment is in order, in perfect order, and they all report the same, but .. . but all radio stations went off the air at seven-fifty-one, and . . . andnobody can discover why."

"But—" cried Mr. Thompson, stopped, glanced about him and screamed, "Nottonight! You can't let it happen tonight! You've got to get me on the air!"

"Mr. Thompson," the man said slowly, "we've called the electroniclaboratory of the State Science Institute. They . . . they've never seenanything like it. They said it might be a natural phenomenon, some sort ofcosmic disturbance of an unprecedented kind, only—"

"Well?"

"Only they don't think it is. We don't, either. They said it looks likeradio waves, but of a frequency never produced before, never observedanywhere, never discovered by anybody."

No one answered him. In a moment, he went on, his voice oddly solemn: "Itlooks like a wall of radio waves jamming the air, and we can't get throughit, we can't touch it, we can't break it. . . . What's more, we can't locateits source, not by any of our usual methods. . . .

Those waves seem to come from a transmitter that . . . that makes anyknown to us look like a child's toy!"

"But that's not possible!" The cry came from behind Mr. Thompson and theyall whirled in its direction, startled by its note of peculiar terror; itcame from Dr. Stadler. "There's no such thing! There's nobody on earth tomake it!"

The chief engineer spread his hands out. "That's it, Dr. Stadler,"he said wearily. "It can't be possible. It shouldn't be possible. Butthere it is."

"Well, do something about it!" cried Mr. Thompson to the crowd at large.No one answered or moved.

"I won't permit this!" cried Mr. Thompson. "I won't permit it! Tonight ofall nights! I've got to make that speech! Do something! Solve it, whatever itis! I order you to solve it!"

The chief engineer was looking at him blankly.

"I'll fire the lot of you for this! I'll fire every electronic engineer inthe country! I'll put the whole profession on trial for sabotage, desertionand treason! Do you hear me? Now do something, God damn you!

Do something!"

The chief engineer was looking at him impassively, as if words were notconveying anything any longer.

"Isn't there anybody around to obey an order?" cried Mr. Thompson. "Isn'tthere a brain left in this country?"

The hand of the clock reached the dot of 8:00.

"Ladies and gentlemen," said a voice that came from the radio receiver—aman's clear, calm, implacable voice, the kind of voice that had not beenheard on the airwaves for years—"Mr. Thompson will not speak to you tonight.His time is up. I have taken it over. You were to hear a report on the worldcrisis. That is what you are going to hear."

Three gasps of recognition greeted the voice, but nobody had the power tonotice them among the sounds of the crowd, which were beyond the stage ofcries. One was a gasp of triumph, another—of terror, the third—of

bewilderment. Three persons had recognized the speaker: Dagny, Dr. Stadler,Eddie Willers. Nobody glanced at Eddie Willers; but Dagny and Dr. Stadlerglanced at each other. She saw that his face was distorted by as evil aterror as one could ever bear to see; he saw that she knew and that the wayshe looked at him was as if the speaker had slapped his face.

"For twelve years, you have been asking: Who is John Gait? This is JohnGait speaking. I am the man who loves his life. I am the man who does notsacrifice his love or his values. I am the man who has deprived you ofvictims and thus has destroyed your world, and if you wish to know why youare perishing—you who dread knowledge—I am the man who will now tell you."

The chief engineer was the only one able to move; he ran to a televisionset and struggled frantically with its dials. But the screen remained empty;the speaker had not chosen to be seen. Only his voice filled the airways ofthe country—of the world, thought the chief engineer—sounding as if he werespeaking here, in this room, not to a group, but to one man; it was not thetone of addressing a meeting, but the tone of addressing a mind.

"You have heard it said that this is an age of moral crisis. You have saidit yourself, half in fear, half in hope that the words had no meaning.

You have cried that man's sins are destroying the world and you havecursed human nature for its unwillingness to practice the virtues youdemanded. Since virtue, to you, consists of sacrifice, you have demanded moresacrifices at every successive disaster. In the name of a return to morality,you have sacrificed all those evils which you held as the cause of yourplight. You have sacrificed justice to mercy. You have sacrificedindependence to unity. You have sacrificed reason to faith.

You have sacrificed wealth to need. You have sacrificed self-esteem toself-denial. You have sacrificed happiness to duty.

"You have destroyed all that which you held to be evil and achieved allthat which you held to be good. Why, then, do you shrink in horror from thesight of the world around you? That world is not the product of your sins, itis the product and the image of your virtues. It is your moral ideal broughtinto reality in its full and final perfection. You have fought for it, youhave dreamed of it, you have wished it, and I —I am the man who has grantedyou your wish.

"Your ideal had an implacable enemy, which your code of morality wasdesigned to destroy. I have withdrawn that enemy. I have taken it out of yourway and out of your reach. I have removed the source of all those evils youwere sacrificing one by one. I have ended your battle. I have stopped yourmotor. I have deprived your world of man's mind.

"Men do not live by the mind, you say? I have withdrawn those who do. Themind is impotent, you say? I have withdrawn those whose mind isn't. There arevalues higher than the mind, you say? I have withdrawn those for whom therearen't.

"While you were dragging to your sacrificial altars the men of justice, ofindependence, of reason, of wealth, of self-esteem—I beat you to it, Ireached them first. I told them the nature of the game you were playing andthe nature of that moral code of yours, which they had been too innocentlygenerous to grasp. I showed them the way to live by another morality—mine. Itis mine that they chose to follow.

"All the men who have vanished, the men you hated, yet dreaded to lose, itis I who have taken them away from you. Do not attempt to find us. We do notchoose to be found. Do not cry that it is our duty to serve you. We do notrecognize such duty- Do not cry that you need us. We do not consider need aclaim. Do not cry that you own us. You don't, Do not beg us to return. We areon strike, we, the men of the mind.

"We are on strike against self-immolation. We are on strike against thecreed of unearned rewards and unrewarded duties. We are on strike against the

dogma that the pursuit of one's happiness is evil. We are on strike againstthe doctrine that life is guilt.

"There is a difference between our strike and all those you've practicedfor centuries: our strike consists, not of making demands, but of grantingthem. We are evil, according to your morality. We have chosen not to harm youany longer. We are useless, according to your economics. We have chosen notto exploit you any longer. We are dangerous and to be shackled, according toyour politics. We have chosen not to endanger you, nor to wear the shacklesany longer. We are only an illusion, according to your philosophy. We havechosen not to blind you any longer and have left you free to face reality—thereality you wanted, the world as you see it now, a world without mind.

"We have granted you everything you demanded of us, we who had always beenthe givers, but have only now understood it. We have no demands to present toyou, no terms to bargain about, no compromise to reach. You have nothing tooffer us. We do not need you.

"Are you now crying: No, this was not what you wanted? A mindless world ofruins was not your goal? You did not want us to leave you? You moralcannibals, I know that you've always known what it was that you wanted. Butyour game is up, because now we know it, too.

"Through centuries of scourges and disasters, brought about by your codeof morality, you have cried that your code had been broken, that the scourgeswere punishment for breaking it, that men were too weak and too selfish tospill al! the blood it required. You damned man, you damned existence, youdamned this earth, but never dared to question your code. Your victims tookthe blame and struggled on, with your curses as reward for their martyrdom-while you went on crying that your code was noble, but human nature was notgood enough to practice it. And no one rose to ask the question: Good?—bywhat standard?

"You wanted to know John Gait's identity. I am the man who has asked thatquestion.

"Yes, this is an age of moral crisis. Yes, you are bearing punishment foryour evil. But it is not man who is now on trial and it is not human naturethat will take the blame. It is your moral code that's through, this time.Your moral code has reached its climax, the blind alley at the end of itscourse. And if you wish to go on living, what you now need is not to returnto morality—you who have never known any—

but to discover it.

"You have heard no concepts of morality but the mystical or the social.You have been taught that morality is a code of behavior imposed on you bywhim, the whim of a supernatural power or the whim of society, to serve God'spurpose or your neighbor's welfare, to please an authority beyond the graveor else next door—but not to serve your life or pleasure. Your pleasure, youhave been taught, is to be found in immorality, your interests would best beserved by evil, and any moral code must be designed not for you, but againstyou, not to further your life, but to drain it.

"For centuries, the battle of morality was fought between those whoclaimed that your life belongs to God and those who claimed that it belongsto your neighbors—between those who preached that the good is self-sacrificefor the sake of ghosts in heaven and those who preached that the good isself-sacrifice for the sake of incompetents on earth. And no one came to saythat your life belongs to you and that the good is to live it.

"Both sides agreed that morality demands the surrender of your selfinterest and of your mind, that the moral and the practical are opposites,that morality is not the province of reason, but the province of faith andforce. Both sides agreed that no rational morality is possible, that there isno right or wrong in reason—that in reason there's no reason to be moral.

"Whatever else they fought about, it was against man's mind that all yourmoralists have stood united. It was man's mind that all their schemes andsystems were intended to despoil and destroy. Now choose to perish or tolearn that the anti-mind is the anti-life.

"Man's mind is his basic tool of survival. Life is given to him, survivalis not. His body is given to him, its sustenance is not. His mind is given tohim, its content is not. To remain alive, he must act, and before he can acthe must know the nature and purpose of his action. He cannot obtain his foodwithout a knowledge of food and of the way to obtain it. He cannot dig aditch—or build a cyclotron—without a knowledge of his aim and of the means toachieve it. To remain alive, he must think.

"But to think is an act of choice. The key to what you so recklessly call'human nature, ' the open secret you live with, yet dread to name, is the factthat man is a being of volitional consciousness. Reason does not workautomatically; thinking is not a mechanical process; the connections of logicare not made by instinct. The function of your stomach, lungs or heart isautomatic; the function of your mind is not. In any hour and issue of yourlife, you are free to think or to evade that effort. But you are not free toescape from your nature, from the fact that reason is your means of survival—so that for you, who are a human being, the question 'to be or not to be' isthe question 'to think or not to think.'

"A being of volitional consciousness has no automatic course of behavior.He needs a code of values to guide his actions. 'Value' is that which oneacts to gain and keep, 'virtue' is the action by which one gains and keepsit. 'Value' presupposes an answer to the question: of value to whom and forwhat? 'Value' presupposes a standard, a purpose and the necessity of actionin the face of an alternative. Where there are no alternatives, no values arepossible.

"There is only one fundamental alternative in the universe: existence ornon-existence—and it pertains to a single class of entities: to livingorganisms. The existence of inanimate matter is unconditional, the existenceof life is not: it depends on a specific course of action. Matter isindestructible, it changes its forms, but it cannot cease to exist. It isonly a living organism that faces a constant alternative: the issue of lifeor death. Life is a process of self-sustaining and self-generated action. Ifan organism fails in that action, it dies; its chemical elements remain, butits life goes out of existence. It is only the concept of 'Life'

that makes the concept of 'Value' possible. It is only to a living entitythat things can be good or evil.

"A plant must feed itself in order to live; the sunlight, the water, thechemicals it needs are the values its nature has set it to pursue; its lifeis the standard of value directing its actions. But a plant has no choice ofaction; there are alternatives in the conditions it encounters, but there isno alternative in its function: it acts automatically to further its life, itcannot act for its own destruction.

"An animal is equipped for sustaining its life; its senses provide it withan automatic code of action, an automatic knowledge of what is good for it orevil. It has no power to extend its knowledge or to evade it. In conditionswhere its knowledge proves inadequate, it dies. But so long as it lives, itacts on its knowledge, with automatic safety and no power of choice, it isunable to ignore its own good, unable to decide to choose the evil and act asits own destroyer.

"Man has no automatic code of survival. His particular distinction fromall other living species is the necessity to act in the face of alternativesby means of volitional choice. He has no automatic knowledge of what is goodfor him or evil, what values his life depends on, what course of action itrequires. Are you prattling about an instinct of self preservation? An

instinct of self-preservation is precisely what man does not possess. An'instinct' is an unerring and automatic form of knowledge. A desire is not aninstinct. A desire to live does not give you the knowledge required forliving. And even man's desire to live is not automatic: your secret eviltoday is that (hat is the desire you do not hold. Your fear of death is not alove for life and will not give you the knowledge needed to keep it. Man mustobtain his knowledge and choose his actions by a process of thinking, whichnature will not force him to perform. Man has the power to act as his owndestroyer—and that is the way he has acted through most of his history.

"A living entity that regarded its means of survival as evil, would notsurvive. A plant that struggled to mangle its roots, a bird that fought tobreak its wings would not remain for long in the existence they affronted.But the history of man has been a struggle to deny and to destroy his mind.

"Man has been called a rational being, but rationality is a matter ofchoice—and the alternative his nature offers him is: rational being orsuicidal animal, Man has to be man—by choice; he has to hold his life as avalue—by choice; he has to learn to sustain it—by choice; he has to discoverthe values it requires and practice his virtues—by choice.

"A code of values accepted by choice is a code of morality.

"Whoever you are, you who are hearing me now, I am speaking to whateverliving remnant is left uncorrupted within you, to the remnant of the human,to your mind, and I say: There is a morality of reason, a morality proper toman, and Man's Life is its standard of value.

"AH that which is proper to the life of a rational being is the good; allthat which destroys it is the evil.

"Man's life, as required by his nature, is not the life of a mindlessbrute, of a looting thug or a mooching mystic, but the life of a thinkingbeing—not life by means of force or fraud, but life by means of achievement—not survival at any price, since there's only one price that pays for man'ssurvival: reason.

"Man's life is the standard of morality, but your own life is its purpose.If existence on earth is your goal, you must choose your actions and valuesby the standard of that which is proper to man—for the purpose of preserving,fulfilling and enjoying the irreplaceable value which is your life.

"Since life requires a specific course of action, any other course willdestroy it- A being who does not hold his own life as the motive and goal ofhis actions, is acting on the motive and standard of death. Such a being is ametaphysical monstrosity, struggling to oppose, negate and contradict thefact of his own existence, running blindly amuck on a trail of destruction,capable of nothing but pain.

"Happiness is the successful state of life, pain is an agent of death.

Happiness is that state of consciousness which proceeds from theachievement of one's values. A morality that dares to tell you to findhappiness in the renunciation of your happiness—to value the failure of yourvalues—is an insolent negation of morality. A doctrine that gives you, as anideal, the role of a sacrificial animal seeking slaughter on the altars ofothers, is giving you death as your standard. By the grace of reality and thenature of life, man—every man—is an end in himself, he exists for his ownsake, and the achievement of his own happiness is his highest moral purpose.

"But neither life nor happiness can be achieved by the pursuit ofirrational whims. Just as man is free to attempt to survive in any randommanner, but will perish unless he lives as his nature requires, so he is freeto seek his happiness in any mindless fraud, but the torture of frustrationis all he will find, unless he seeks the happiness proper to man. The purposeof morality is to teach you, not to suffer and die, but to enjoy yourself andlive.

"Sweep aside those parasites of subsidized classrooms, who live on theprofits of the mind of others and proclaim that man needs no morality, novalues, no code of behavior. They, who pose as scientists and claim that manis only an animal, do not grant him inclusion in the law of existence theyhave granted to the lowest of insects. They recognize that every livingspecies has a way of survival demanded by its nature, they do not claim thata fish can live out of water or that a dog can live without its sense ofsmell—but man, they claim, the most complex of beings, man can survive in anyway whatever, man has no identity, no nature, and there's no practical reasonwhy he cannot live with his means of survival destroyed, with his mindthrottled and placed at the disposal of any orders they might care to issue.

"Sweep aside those hatred-eaten mystics, who pose as friends of humanityand preach that the highest virtue man can practice is to hold his own lifeas of no value. Do they tell you that the purpose of morality is to curbman's instinct of self-preservation? It is for the purpose of self-preservation that man needs a code of morality. The only man who desires tobe moral is the man who desires to live.

"No, you do not have to live; it is your basic act of choice; but if youchoose to live, you must live as a man—by the work and the judgment of yourmind.

"No, you do not have to live as a man; it is an act of moral choice. Butyou cannot live as anything else—and the alternative is that state of livingdeath which you now see within you and around you, the state of a thing unfitfor existence, no longer human and less than animal, a thing that knowsnothing but pain and drags itself through its span of years in the agony ofunthinking self-destruction.

"No, you do not have to think; it is an act of moral choice. But someonehad to think to keep you alive; if you choose to default, you default onexistence and you pass the deficit to some moral man, expecting him tosacrifice his good for the sake of letting you survive by your evil.

"No, you do not have to be a man; but today those who are, are not thereany longer. I have removed your means of survival—your victims.

"If you wish to know how I have done it and what I told them to make themquit, you are hearing it now. I told them, in essence, the statement I ammaking tonight. They were men who had lived by my code, but had not known howgreat a virtue it represented. I made them see it. I brought them, not a re-evaluation, but only an identification of their values.

"We, the men of the mind, are now on strike against you in the name of asingle axiom, which is the root of our moral code, just as the root of yoursis the wish to escape it: the axiom that existence exists.

"Existence exists—and the act of grasping that statement implies twocorollary axioms: that something exists which one perceives and that oneexists possessing consciousness, consciousness being the faculty ofperceiving that which exists.

"If nothing exists, there can be no consciousness: a consciousness withnothing to be conscious of is a contradiction in terms. A consciousnessconscious of nothing but itself is a contradiction in terms: before it couldidentify itself as consciousness, it had to be conscious of something. Ifthat which you claim to perceive does not exist, what you possess is notconsciousness.

"Whatever the degree of your knowledge, these two—existence andconsciousness—are axioms you cannot escape, these two are the irreducibleprimaries implied in any action you undertake, in any part of your knowledgeand in its sum, from the first ray of light you perceive at the start of yourlife to the widest erudition you might acquire at its end. Whether you knowthe shape of a pebble or the structure of a solar system, the axioms remainthe same: that it exists and that you know it.

"To exist is to be something, as distinguished from the nothing of non-existence, it is to be an entity of a specific nature made of specificattributes. Centuries ago, the man who was—no matter what his errors —thegreatest of. your philosophers, has stated the formula defining the conceptof existence and the rule of all knowledge: A is A. A. thing is itself. Youhave never grasped the meaning of his statement. I am here to complete it:Existence is Identity, Consciousness is Identification.

"Whatever you choose to consider, be it an object, an attribute or anaction, the law of identity remains the same. A leaf cannot be a stone at thesame time, it cannot be all red and all green at the same time, it cannotfreeze and burn at the same time. A is A. Or, if you wish it stated insimpler language: You cannot have your cake and eat it, too.

"Are you seeking to know what is wrong with the world? AH the disastersthat have wrecked your world, came from your leadersl attempt to evade thefact that A is A. All the secret evil you dread to face within you and allthe pain you have ever endured, came from your own attempt to evade the factthat A is A. The purpose of those who taught you to evade it, was to make youforget that Man is Man.

"Man cannot survive except by gaining knowledge, and reason is his onlymeans to gain it. Reason is the faculty that perceives, identifies andintegrates the material provided by his senses. The task of his senses is togive him the evidence of existence, but the task of identifying it belongs tohis reason, his senses tell him only that something is, but what it is mustbe learned by his mind.

"All thinking is a process of identification and integration. Manperceives a blob of color; by integrating the evidence of his sight and histouch, he learns to identity it as a solid object: he learns to identify theobject as a table; he learns that the table is made of wood; he learns thatthe wood consists of cells, that the cells consist of molecules, that themolecules consist of atoms. All through this process, the work of his mindconsists of answers to a single question: What is it? His means to establishthe truth of his answers is logic, and logic rests on the axiom thatexistence exists. Logic is the art of non-contradictory identification.

A contradiction cannot exist. An atom is itself, and so is the universe;neither can contradict its own identity; nor can a part contradict the whole.No concept man forms is valid unless he integrates it without contradictioninto the total sum of his knowledge. To arrive at a contradiction is toconfess an error in one's thinking; to maintain a contradiction is toabdicate one's mind and to evict oneself from the realm of reality.

"Reality is that which exists; the unreal does not exist; the unreal ismerely that negation of existence which is the content of a humanconsciousness when it attempts to abandon reason. Truth is the recognition ofreality; reason, man's only means of knowledge, is his only standard oftruth.

"The most depraved sentence you can now utter is to ask: Whose reason? Theanswer is: Yours. No matter how vast your knowledge or how modest, it is yourown mind that has to acquire it. It is only with your own knowledge that youcan deal. It is only your own knowledge that you can claim to possess or askothers to consider. Your mind is your only judge of truth—and if othersdissent from your verdict, reality is the court of final appeal. Nothing buta man's mind can perform that complex, delicate, crucial process ofidentification which is thinking. Nothing can direct the process but his ownjudgment. Nothing can direct his judgment but his moral integrity.

"You who speak of a 'moral instinct' as if it were some separate endowmentopposed to reason—man's reason is his moral faculty. A process of reason is aprocess of constant choice in answer to the question: True or False?—Right orWrong? Is a seed to be planted in soil in order to grow—right or wrong? Is a

man's wound to be disinfected in order to save his life—right or wrong? Doesthe nature of atmospheric electricity permit it to be converted into kineticpower—right or wrong? It is the answers to such questions that gave youeverything you have—and the answers came from a man's mind, a mind ofintransigent devotion to that which is right.

"A rational process is a moral process. You may make an error at any stepof it, with nothing to protect you but your own severity, or you may try tocheat, to fake the evidence and evade the effort of the quest—but if devotionto truth is the hallmark of morality, then there is no greater, nobler, moreheroic form of devotion than the act of a man who assumes the responsibilityof thinking.

"That which you call your soul or spirit is your consciousness, and thatwhich you call 'free will' is your mind's freedom to think or not, the onlywill you have, your only freedom, the choice that controls all the choicesyou make and determines your life and your character.

"Thinking is man's only basic virtue, from which all the others proceed.And his basic vice, the source of all his evils, is that nameless act whichall of you practice, but struggle never to admit: the act of blanking out,the willful suspension of one's consciousness, the refusal to think—notblindness, but the refusal to see; not ignorance, but the refusal to know. Itis the act of unfocusing your mind and inducing an inner fog to escape theresponsibility of judgment—on the unstated premise that a thing will notexist if only you refuse to identify it, that A will not be A so long as youdo not pronounce the verdict 'It is.'

Non-thinking is an act of annihilation, a wish to negate existence, anattempt to wipe out reality. But existence exists; reality is not to be wipedout, it will merely wipe out the wiper. By refusing to say 'It is,'

you are refusing to say 'I am.' By suspending your judgment, you arenegating your person. When a man declares: 'Who am I to know?'—he isdeclaring: 'Who am I to live?'

"This, in every hour and every issue, is your basic moral choice: thinkingor non-thinking, existence or non-existence, A or non-A, entity or zero.

"To the extent to which a man is rational, life is the premise directinghis actions. To the extent to which he is irrational, the premise directinghis actions is death.

"You who prattle that morality is social and that man would need nomorality on a desert island—it is on a desert island that he would need itmost. Let him try to claim, when there are no victims to pay for it, that arock is a house, that sand is clothing, that food will drop into his mouthwithout cause or effort, that he will collect a harvest tomorrow by devouringhis stock seed today—and reality will wipe him out, as he deserves; realitywill show him that life is a value to be bought and that thinking is the onlycoin noble enough to buy it.

"If I were to speak your kind of language, I would say that man's onlymoral commandment is: Thou shall think. But a 'moral commandment' is acontradiction in terms. The moral is the chosen, not the forced; theunderstood, not the obeyed. The moral is the rational, and reason accepts nocommandments.

"My morality, the morality of reason, is contained in a single axiom:existence exists—and in a single choice: to live. The rest proceeds fromthese. To live, man must hold three things as the supreme and ruling valuesof his life: Reason—Purpose—Self-esteem. Reason, as his only tool ofknowledge—Purpose, as his choice of the happiness which that tool mustproceed to achieve—Self-esteem, as his inviolate certainty that his mind iscompetent to think and his person is worthy of happiness, which means: isworthy of living. These three values imply and require all of man's virtues,and all his virtues pertain to the relation of existence and consciousness:

rationality, independence, integrity, honesty, justice, productiveness,pride.

"Rationality is the recognition of the fact that existence exists, thatnothing can alter the truth and nothing can take precedence over that act ofperceiving it, which is thinking—that the mind is one's only judge of valuesand one's only guide of action—that reason is an absolute that permits nocompromise—that a concession to the irrational invalidates one'sconsciousness and turns it from the task of perceiving to the task of fakingreality—that the alleged short-cut to knowledge, which is faith, is only ashort-circuit destroying the mind—that the acceptance of a mystical inventionis a wish for the annihilation of existence and, properly, annihilates one'sconsciousness.

"Independence is the recognition of the fact that yours is theresponsibility of judgment and nothing can help you escape it—that nosubstitute can do your thinking, as no pinch-hitter can live your life—

that the vilest form of self-abasement and self-destruction is thesubordination of your mind to the mind of another, the acceptance of anauthority over your brain, the acceptance of his assertions as facts, hissay-so as truth, his edicts as middle-man between your consciousness and yourexistence.

"Integrity is the recognition of the fact that you cannot fake yourconsciousness, just as honesty is the recognition of the fact that you cannotfake existence—that man is an indivisible entity, an integrated unit of twoattributes: of matter and consciousness, and that he may permit no breachbetween body and mind, between action and thought, between his life and hisconvictions—that, like a judge impervious to public opinion, he may notsacrifice his convictions to the wishes of others, be it the whole of mankindshouting pleas or threats against him—that courage and confidence arepractical necessities, that courage is the practical form of being true toexistence, of being true to truth, and confidence is the practical form ofbeing true to one's own consciousness.

"Honesty is the recognition of the fact that the unreal is unreal and canhave no value, that neither love nor fame nor cash is a value if obtained byfraud—that an attempt to gain a value by deceiving the mind of others is anact of raising your victims to a position higher than reality, where youbecome a pawn of their blindness, a slave of their non-thinking and theirevasions, while their intelligence, their rationality, their perceptivenessbecome the enemies you have to dread and flee—that you do not care to live asa dependent, least of all a dependent on the stupidity of others, or as afool whose source of values is the fools he succeeds in fooling—that honestyis not a social duty, not a sacrifice for the sake of others, but the mostprofoundly selfish virtue man can practice: his refusal to sacrifice thereality of his own existence to the deluded consciousness of others.

"Justice is the recognition of the fact that you cannot fake the characterof men as you cannot fake the character of nature, that you must judge allmen as conscientiously as you judge inanimate objects, with the same respectfor truth, with the same incorruptible vision, by as pure and as rational aprocess of identification—that every man must be judged for what he is andtreated accordingly, that just as you do not pay a higher price for a rustychunk of scrap than for a piece of shining metal, so you do not value arotter above a hero—that your moral appraisal is the coin paying men fortheir virtues or vices, and this payment demands of you as scrupulous anhonor as you bring to financial transactions—that to withhold your contemptfrom men's vices is an act of moral counterfeiting, and to withhold youradmiration from their virtues is an act of moral embezzlement—that to placeany other concern higher than justice is to devaluate your moral currency anddefraud the good in favor of the evil, since only the good can lose by a

default of justice and only the evil can profit—and that the bottom of thepit at the end of that road, the act of moral bankruptcy, is to punish menfor their virtues and reward them for their vices, that that is the collapseto full depravity, the Black Mass of the worship of death, the dedication ofyour consciousness to the destruction of existence.

"Productiveness is your acceptance of morality, your recognition of thefact that you choose to live—that productive work is the process by whichman's consciousness controls his existence, a constant process of acquiringknowledge and shaping matter to fit one's purpose, of translating an ideainto physical form, of remaking the earth in the image of one's values—thatall work is creative work ft done by a thinking mind, and no work is creativeif done by a blank who repeats in uncritical stupor a routine he has learnedfrom others—that your work is yours to choose, and the choice is as wide asyour mind, that nothing more is possible to you and nothing less is human—that to cheat your way into a job bigger than your mind can handle is tobecome a fear corroded ape on borrowed motions and borrowed time, and tosettle down into a job that requires less than your mind's full capacity isto cut your motor and sentence yourself to another kind of motion: decay—thatyour work is the process of achieving your values, and to lose your ambitionfor values is to lose your ambition to live—that your body is a machine, butyour mind is its driver, and you must drive as far as your mind will takeyou, with achievement as the goal of your road—that the man who has nopurpose is a machine that coasts downhill at the mercy of any boulder tocrash in the first chance ditch, that the man who stifles his mind is astalled machine slowly going to rust, that the man who lets a leaderprescribe his course is a wreck being towed to the scrap heap, and the manwho makes another man his goal is a hitchhiker no driver should ever pick up—that your work is the purpose of your life, and you must speed past anykiller who assumes the right to stop you, that any value you might findoutside your work, any other loyalty or love, can be only travelers youchoose to share your journey and must be travelers going on their own powerin the same direction.

"Pride is the recognition of the fact that you are your own highest valueand, like all of man's values, it has to be earned—that of any achievementsopen to you, the one that makes all others possible is the creation of yourown character—that your character, your actions, your desires, your emotionsare the products of the premises held by your mind—that as man must producethe physical values he needs to sustain his life, so he must acquire thevalues of character that make his life worth sustaining—that as man is abeing of self-made wealth, so he is a being of self-made soul—that to liverequires a sense of self-value, but man, who has no automatic values, has noautomatic sense of self-esteem and must earn it by shaping his soul in theimage of his moral ideal, in the image of Man, the rational being he is bornable to create, but must create by choice—that the first precondition ofself-esteem is that radiant selfishness of soul which desires the best in allthings, in values of matter and spirit, a soul that seeks above all else toachieve its own moral perfection, valuing nothing higher than itself—and thatthe proof of an achieved self-esteem is your soul's shudder of contempt andrebellion against the role of a sacrificial animal, against the vileimpertinence of any creed that proposes to immolate the irreplaceable valuewhich is your consciousness and the incomparable glory which is yourexistence to the blind evasions and the stagnant decay of others.

"Are you beginning to see who is John Gait? I am the man who has earnedthe thing you did not fight for, the thing you have renounced, betrayed,corrupted, yet were unable fully to destroy and are now hiding as your guiltysecret, spending your Me in apologies to every professional cannibal, lest itbe discovered that somewhere within you, you still long to say what I am now

saying to the hearing of the whole of mankind: I am proud of my own value andof the fact that I wish to live.

"This wish—which you share, yet submerge as an evil—is the only remnant ofthe good within you, but it is a wish one must learn to deserve. His ownhappiness is man's only moral purpose, but only his own virtue can achieveit. Virtue is not an end in itself. Virtue is not its own reward orsacrificial fodder for the reward of evil. Life is the reward of virtue—andhappiness is the goal and the reward of life.

"Just as your body has two fundamental sensations, pleasure and pain, assigns of its welfare or injury, as a barometer of its basic alternative, lifeor death, so your consciousness has two fundamental emotions, joy andsuffering, in answer to the same alternative. Your emotions are estimates ofthat which furthers your life or threatens it, lightning calculators givingyou a sum of your profit or loss. You have no choice about your capacity tofeel that something is good for you or evil, but what you will consider goodor evil, what will give you joy or pain, what you will love or hate, desireor fear, depends on your standard of value. Emotions are inherent in yournature, but their content is dictated by your mind. Your emotional capacityis an empty motor, and your values are the fuel with which your mind fillsit. If you choose a mix of contradictions, it will clog your motor, corrodeyour transmission and wreck you on your first attempt to move with a machinewhich you, the driver, have corrupted.

"If you hold the irrational as your standard of value and the impossibleas your concept of the good, if you long for rewards you have not earned, fora fortune or a love you don't deserve, for a loophole in the law ofcausality, for an A that becomes non-A at your whim, if you desire theopposite of existence—you will reach it. Do not cry, when you reach it, thatlife is frustration and that happiness is impossible to man; check your fuel:it brought you where you wanted to go.

"Happiness is not to be achieved at the command of emotional whims.Happiness is not the satisfaction of whatever irrational wishes you mightblindly attempt to indulge. Happiness is a state of non contradictory joy—ajoy without penalty or guilt, a joy that does not clash with any of yourvalues and does not work for your own destruction, not the joy of escapingfrom your mind, but of using your mind's fullest power, not the joy of fakingreality, but of achieving values that are real, not the joy of a drunkard,but of a producer. Happiness is possible only to a rational man, the man whodesires nothing but rational goals, seeks nothing but rational values andfinds his joy in nothing but rational actions.

"Just as I support my life, neither by robbery nor alms, but by my owneffort, so I do not seek to derive my happiness from the injury or the favorof others, but earn it by my own achievement. Just as I do not consider thepleasure of others as the goal of my life, so I do not consider my pleasureas the goal of the lives of others. Just as there are no contradictions in myvalues and no conflicts among my desires—so there are no victims and noconflicts of interest among rational men, men who do not desire the unearnedand do not view one another with a cannibal's lust, men who neither makesacrifices nor accept them.

"The symbol of all relationships among such men, the moral symbol ofrespect for human beings, is the trader. We, who live by values, not by loot,are traders, both in matter and in spirit. A trader is a man who earns whathe gets and does not give or take the undeserved. A trader does not ask to bepaid for his failures, nor does he ask to be loved for his flaws, A traderdoes not squander his body as fodder or his soul as alms. Just as he does notgive his work except in trade for material values, so he does not give thevalues of his spirit—his love, his friendship, his esteem—except in paymentand in trade for human virtues, in payment for his own selfish pleasure,

which he receives from men he can respect. The mystic parasites who have,throughout the ages, reviled the traders and held them in contempt, whilehonoring the beggars and the looters, have known the secret motive of theirsneers: a trader is the entity they dread—a man of justice."Do you ask what moral obligation I owe to my fellow men?

None—except the obligation I owe to myself, to material objects and to allof existence: rationality. I deal with men as my nature and theirs demands:by means of reason. I seek or desire nothing from them except such relationsas they care to enter of their own voluntary choice.

It is only with their mind that I can deal and only for my own selfinterest, when they see that my interest coincides with theirs. When theydon't, I enter no relationship; I let dissenters go their way and I do notswerve from mine. I win by means of nothing but logic and I surrender tonothing but logic. I do not surrender my reason or deal with men whosurrender theirs. I have nothing to gain from fools or cowards; I have nobenefits to seek from human vices: from stupidity, dishonesty or fear. Theonly value men can offer me is the work of their mind. When I disagree with arational man, I let reality be our final arbiter; if I am right, he willlearn; if I am wrong, I will; one of us will win, but both will profit.

"Whatever may be open to disagreement, there is one act of evil that maynot, the act that no man may commit against others and no man may sanction orforgive. So long as men desire to live together, no man may initiate—do youhear me? no man may start—the use of physical force against others.

"To interpose the threat of physical destruction between a man and hisperception of reality, is to negate and paralyze his means of survival; toforce him to act against his own judgment, is like forcing him to act againsthis own sight. Whoever, to whatever purpose or extent, initiates the use offorce, is a killer acting on the premise of death in a manner wider thanmurder: the premise of destroying man's capacity to live.

"Do not open your mouth to tell me that your mind has convinced you ofyour right to force my mind. Force and mind are opposites; morality endswhere a gun begins. When you declare that men are irrational animals andpropose to treat them as such, you define thereby your own character and canno longer claim the sanction of reason—as no advocate of contradictions canclaim it. There can be no 'right' to destroy the source of rights, the onlymeans of judging right and wrong: the mind.

"To force a man to drop his own mind and to accept your will as asubstitute, with a gun in. place of a syllogism, with terror in place ofproof, and death as the final argument—is to attempt to exist in defiance ofreality. Reality demands of man that he act for his own rational interest;your gun demands of him that he act against it. Reality threatens man withdeath if he does not act on his rational judgment; you threaten him withdeath if he does. You place him into a world where the price of his life isthe surrender of all the virtues required by life—and death by a process ofgradual destruction is all that you and your system will achieve, when deathis made to be the ruling power, the winning argument in a society of men.

"Be it a highwayman who confronts a traveler with the ultimatum: 'Yourmoney or your life, ' or a politician who confronts a country with theultimatum: 'Your children's education or your life,' the meaning of thatultimatum is: 'Your mind or your life'—and neither is possible to man withoutthe other.

"If there are degrees of evil, it is hard to say who is the morecontemptible: the brute who assumes the right to force the mind of others orthe moral degenerate who grants to others the right to force his mind.

That is the moral absolute one does not leave open to debate. I do notgrant the terms of reason to men who propose to deprive me of reason. I donot enter discussions with neighbors who think they can forbid me to think. I

do not place my moral sanction upon a murderer's wish to kill me. When a manattempts to deal with me by force, I answer him—by force.

"It is only as retaliation that force may be used and only against the manwho starts its use. No, I do not share his evil or sink to his concept ofmorality: I merely grant him his choice, destruction, the only destruction hehad the right to choose: his own. He uses force to seize a value; I use itonly to destroy destruction. A holdup man seeks to gain wealth by killing me;I do not grow richer by killing a holdup man. I seek no values by means ofevil, nor do I surrender my values to evil.

"In the name of all the producers who had kept you alive and received yourdeath ultimatums in payment, I now answer you with a single ultimatum of ourown: Our work or your guns. You can choose either; you can't have both. We donot initiate the use of force against others or submit to force at theirhands. If you desire ever again to live in an industrial society, it will beon our moral terms. Our terms and our motive power are the antithesis ofyours. You have been using fear as your weapon and have been bringing deathto man as his punishment for rejecting your morality. We offer him life ashis reward for accepting ours.

"You who are worshippers of the zero—you have never discovered thatachieving life is not the equivalent of avoiding death. Joy is not 'theabsence of pain, ' intelligence is not 'the absence of stupidity, ' light isnot 'the absence of darkness,' an entity is not 'the absence of a nonentity.'Building is not done by abstaining from demolition; centuries of sitting andwaiting in such abstinence will not raise one single girder for you toabstain from demolishing—and now you can no longer say to me, the builder:'Produce, and feed us in exchange for our not destroying your production.' Iam answering in the name of all your victims: Perish with and in your ownvoid. Existence is not a negation of negatives. Evil, not value, is anabsence and a negation, evil is impotent and has no power but that which welet it extort from. us. Perish, because we have learned that a zero cannothold a mortgage over life.

"You seek escape from pain. We seek the achievement of happiness.

You exist for the sake of avoiding punishment. We exist for the sake ofearning rewards. Threats will not make us function; fear is not ourincentive. It is not death that we wish to avoid, but life that we wish tolive.

"You, who have lost the concept of the difference, you who claim that fearand joy are incentives of equal power—and secretly add that fear is the more'practical'—you do not wish to live, and only fear of death still holds youto the existence you have damned. You dart in panic through the trap of yourdays, looking for the exit you have closed, running from a pursuer you darenot name to a terror you dare not acknowledge, and the greater your terrorthe greater your dread of the only act that could save you: thinking. Thepurpose of your struggle is not to know, not to grasp or name or hear thething I shall now state to your hearing: that yours is the Morality of Death.

"Death is the standard of your values, death is your chosen goal, and youhave to keep running, since there is no escape from the pursuer who is out todestroy you or from the knowledge that that pursuer is yourself. Stoprunning, for once—there is no place to run-stand naked, as you dread to stand, but as I see you, and take a look atwhat you dared to call a moral code.

"Damnation is the start of your morality, destruction is its purpose,means and end. Your code begins by damning man as evil, then demands that hepractice a good which it defines as impossible for him to practice. Itdemands, as his first proof of virtue, that he accept his own depravitywithout proof. It demands that he start, not with a standard of value, but

with a standard of evil, which is himself, by means of which he is then todefine the good: the good is that which he is not.

"It does not matter who then becomes the profiteer on his renounced gloryand tormented soul, a mystic God with some incomprehensible design or anypasser-by whose rotting sores are held as some inexplicable claim upon him—itdoes not matter, the good is not for him to understand, his duty is to crawlthrough years of penance, atoning for the guilt of his existence to any straycollector of unintelligible debts, his only concept of a value is a zero: thegood is that which is non-man.

"The name of this monstrous absurdity is Original Sin, "A sin withoutvolition is a slap at morality and an insolent contradiction in terms: thatwhich is outside the possibility of choice is outside the province ofmorality. If man is evil by birth, he has no will, no power to change it; ifhe has no will, he can be neither good nor evil; a robot is amoral. To hold,as man's sin, a fact not open to his choice is a mockery of morality. To holdman's nature as his sin is a mockery of nature. To punish him for a crime hecommitted before he was born is a mockery of justice. To hold him guilty in amatter where no innocence exists is a mockery of reason. To destroy morality,nature, justice and reason by means of a single concept is a feat of evilhardly to be matched. Yet that is the root of your code.

"Do not hide behind the cowardly evasion that man is born with free will,but with a 'tendency' to evil. A free will saddled with a tendency is. like agame with loaded dice. It forces man to struggle through the effort ofplaying, to bear responsibility and pay for the game, but the decision isweighted in favor of a tendency that he had no power to escape. If thetendency is of his choice, he cannot possess it at birth; if it is not of hischoice, his will is not free.

"What is the nature of the guilt that your teachers call his Original Sin?What are the evils man acquired when he fell from a state they considerperfection? Their myth declares that he ate the fruit of the tree ofknowledge—he acquired a mind and became a rational being.

It was the knowledge of good and evil—he became a moral being. He wassentenced to earn his bread by his labor—he became a productive being. He wassentenced to experience desire—he acquired the capacity of sexual enjoyment.The evils for which they damn him are reason, morality, creativeness, joy—allthe cardinal values of his existence. It is not his vices that their myth ofman's fall is designed to explain and condemn, it is not his errors that theyhold as his guilt, but the essence of his nature as man. Whatever he was—thatrobot in the Garden of Eden, who existed without mind, without values,without labor, without love—he was not man.

"Man's fall, according to your teachers, was that he gained the virtuesrequired to live. These virtues, by their standard, are his Sin.

His evil, they charge, is that he's man. His guilt, they charge, is thathe lives.

"They call it a morality of mercy and a doctrine of love for man.

"No, they say, they do not preach that man is evil, the evil is only thatalien object: his body. No, they say, they do not wish to kill him, they onlywish to make him lose his body. They seek to help him, they say, against hispain—and they point at the torture rack to which they've tied him, the rackwith two wheels that pull him in opposite directions, the rack of thedoctrine that splits his soul and body.

"They have cut man in two, setting one half against the other. They havetaught him that his body and his consciousness are two enemies engaged indeadly conflict, two antagonists of opposite natures, contradictory claims,incompatible needs, that to benefit one is to injure the other, that his soulbelongs to a supernatural realm, but his body is an evil prison holding it inbondage to this earth—and that the good is to defeat his body, to undermine

it by years of patient struggle, digging his way to that glorious jail-breakwhich leads into the freedom of the grave.

"They have taught man that he is a hopeless misfit made of two elements,both symbols of death. A body without a soul is a corpse, a soul without abody is a ghost—yet such is their image of man's nature: the battleground ofa struggle between a corpse and a ghost, a corpse endowed with some evilvolition of its own and a ghost endowed with the knowledge that everythingknown to man is non-existent, that only the unknowable exists.

"Do you observe what human faculty that doctrine was designed to ignore?It was man's mind that had to be negated in order to make him fall apart.Once he surrendered reason, he was left at the mercy of two monsters whom hecould not fathom or control: of a body moved by unaccountable instincts andof a soul moved by mystic revelations-he was left as the passively ravaged victim of a battle between a robotand a dictaphone.

"And as he now crawls through the wreckage, groping blindly for a way tolive, your teachers offer him the help of a morality that proclaims thathe'll find no solution, and must seek no fulfillment on earth. Realexistence, they tell him, is that which he cannot perceive, trueconsciousness is the faculty of perceiving the non-existent—and if he isunable to understand it, that is the proof that his existence is evil andhis. consciousness impotent.

"As products of the split between man's soul and body, there are two kindsof teachers of the Morality of Death: the mystics of spirit and the mysticsof muscle, whom you call the spiritualists and the materialists, those whobelieve in consciousness without existence and those who believe in existencewithout consciousness. Both demand the surrender of your mind, one to theirrevelations, the other to their reflexes. No matter how loudly they posturein the roles of irreconcilable antagonists, their moral codes are alike, andso are their aims: in matter—the enslavement of man's body, in spirit—thedestruction of his mind.

"The good, say the mystics of spirit, is God, a being whose onlydefinition is that he is beyond man's power to conceive—a definition thatinvalidates man's consciousness and nullifies his concepts of existence. Thegood, say the mystics of muscle, is Society—a thing which they define as anorganism that possesses no physical form, a super-being embodied in no one inparticular and everyone in general except yourself. Man's mind, say themystics of spirit, must be subordinated to the will of God, Man's mind, saythe mystics of muscle, must be subordinated to the will of Society. Man'sstandard of value, say the mystics of spirit, is the pleasure of God, whosestandards are beyond man's power of comprehension and must be accepted onfaith. Man's standard of value, say the mystics of muscle, is the pleasure ofSociety, whose standards are beyond man's right of judgment and must beobeyed as a primary absolute. The purpose of man's life, say both, is tobecome an abject zombie who serves a purpose he does not know, for reasons heis not to question. His reward, say the mystics of spirit, will be given tohim beyond the grave. His reward, say the mystics of muscle, will be given onearth—to his great-grandchildren.

"Selfishness—say both—is man's evil. Man's good—say both—is to give up hispersonal desires, to deny himself, renounce himself, surrender; man's good isto negate the life he lives. Sacrifice—cry both—is the essence of morality,the highest virtue within man's reach.

"Whoever is now within reach of my voice, whoever is man the victim, notman the killer, I am speaking at the deathbed of your mind, at the brink ofthat darkness in which you're drowning, and if there still remains within youthe power to struggle to hold on to those fading sparks which had beenyourself—use it now. The word that has destroyed you is 'sacrifice.' Use the

last of your strength to understand its meaning. You're still alive. You havea chance.

" 'Sacrifice' does not mean the rejection of the worthless, but of theprecious. 'Sacrifice' does not mean the rejection of the evil for the sake ofthe good, but of the good for the sake of the evil. 'Sacrifice'

is the surrender of that which you value in favor of that which you don't.

"If you exchange a penny for a dollar, it is not a sacrifice; if youexchange a dollar for a penny, it is. If you achieve the career you wanted,after years of struggle, it is not a sacrifice; if you then renounce it forthe sake of a rival, it is. If you own a bottle of milk and give it to yourstarving child, it is not a sacrifice; if you give it to your neighbor'schild and let your own die, it is.

"If you give money to help a friend, it is not a sacrifice; if you give itto a worthless stranger, it is. If you give your friend a sum you can afford,it is not a sacrifice; if you give him money at the cost of your owndiscomfort, it is only a partial virtue, according to this sort of moralstandard; if you give him money at the cost of disaster to yourself—

that is the virtue of sacrifice in full.

"If you renounce all personal desires and dedicate your life to those youlove, you do not achieve full virtue: you still retain a value of your own,which is your love. If you devote your life to random strangers, it is an actof greater virtue. If you devote your life to serving men you hate—that isthe greatest of the virtues you can practice, "A sacrifice is the surrenderof a value. Full sacrifice is full surrender of all values. If you wish toachieve full virtue, you must seek no gratitude in return for your sacrifice,no praise, no love, no admiration, no self-esteem, not even the pride ofbeing virtuous; the faintest trace of any gain dilutes your virtue. If youpursue a course of action that does not taint your life by any joy, thatbrings you no value in matter, no value in spirit, no gain, no profit, noreward—if you achieve this state of total zero, you have achieved the idealof moral perfection.

"You are told that moral perfection is impossible to man—and, by thisstandard, it is. You cannot achieve it so long as you live, but the value ofyour life and of your person is gauged by how closely you succeed inapproaching that ideal zero which is death.

"If you start, however, as a passionless blank, as a vegetable seeking tobe eaten, with no values to reject and no wishes to renounce, you will notwin the crown of sacrifice. It is not a sacrifice to renounce the unwanted.It is not a sacrifice to give your life for others, if death is your personaldesire. To achieve the virtue of sacrifice, you must want to live, you mustlove it, you must burn with passion for this earth and for all the splendorit can give you—you must feel the twist of every knife as it slashes yourdesires away from your reach and drains your love out of your body. It is notmere death that the morality of sacrifice holds out to you as an ideal, butdeath by slow torture.

"Do not remind me that it pertains only to this life on earth. I amconcerned with no other. Neither are you.

"If you wish to save the last of your dignity, do not call your bestactions a 'sacrifice': that term brands you as immoral. If a mother buys foodfor her hungry child rather than a hat for herself, it is not a sacrifice:she values the child higher than the hat; but it is a sacrifice to the kindof mother whose higher value is the hat, who would prefer her child to starveand feeds him only from a sense of duty. If a man dies fighting for his ownfreedom, it is not a sacrifice: he is not willing to live as a slave; but itis a sacrifice to the kind of man who's willing.

If a man refuses to sell his convictions, it is not a sacrifice, unless heis the sort of man who has no convictions.

"Sacrifice could be proper only for those who have nothing to sacrifice—novalues, no standards, no judgment—those whose desires are irrational whims,blindly conceived and lightly surrendered. For a man of moral stature, whosedesires are born of rational values, sacrifice is the surrender of the rightto the wrong, of the good to the evil.

"The creed of sacrifice is a morality for the immoral—a morality thatdeclares its own bankruptcy by confessing that it can't impart to men anypersonal stake in virtues or values, and that their souls are sewers ofdepravity, which they must be taught to sacrifice. By its own confession, itis impotent to teach men to be good and can only subject them to constantpunishment.

"Are you thinking, in some foggy stupor, that it's only material valuesthat your morality requires you to sacrifice? And what do you think arematerial values? Matter has no value except as a means for the satisfactionof human desires. Matter is only a tool of human values.

To what service are you asked to give the material tools your virtue hasproduced? To the service of that which you regard as evil: to a principle youdo not share, to a person you do not respect, to the achievement of a purposeopposed to your own—else your gift is not a sacrifice.

"Your morality tells you to renounce the material world and to divorceyour values from matter. A man whose values are given no expression inmaterial form, whose existence is unrelated to his ideals, whose actionscontradict his convictions, is a cheap little hypocrite-yet that is the man who obeys your morality and divorces his values frommatter. The man who loves one woman, but sleeps with another—

the man who admires the talent of a worker, but hires another—the man whoconsiders one cause to be just, but donates his money to the support ofanother—the man who holds high standards of craftsmanship, but devotes hiseffort to the production of trash—these are the men who have renouncedmatter, the men who believe that the values of their spirit cannot be broughtinto material reality.

"Do you say it is the spirit that such men have renounced? Yes, of course.You cannot have one without the other. You are an indivisible entity ofmatter and consciousness. Renounce your consciousness and you become a brute.Renounce your body and you become a fake.

Renounce the material world and you surrender it to evil.

"And that is precisely the goal of your morality, the duty that your codedemands of you. Give to that which you do not enjoy, serve that which you donot admire, submit to that which you consider evil-surrender the world to the values of others, deny, reject, renounce yourself. Your self is your mind; renounce it and you become a chunk of meatready for any cannibal to swallow.

"It is your mind that they want you to surrender—all those who preach thecreed of sacrifice, whatever their tags or their motives, whether they demandit for the sake of your soul or of your body, whether they promise youanother life in heaven or a full stomach on this earth. Those who start bysaying: 'It is selfish to pursue your own wishes, you must sacrifice them tothe wishes of others'—end up by saying: 'It is selfish to uphold yourconvictions, you must sacrifice them to the convictions of others.'

"This much is true: the most selfish of all things is the independent mindthat recognizes no authority higher than its own and no value higher than itsjudgment of truth. You are asked to sacrifice your intellectual integrity,your logic, your reason, your standard of truth—

in favor of becoming a prostitute whose standard is the greatest good forthe greatest number.

"If you search your code for guidance, for an answer to the question:'What is the good?'—the only answer you will find is 'The good of others.'

The good is whatever others wish, whatever you feel they feel they wish, orwhatever you feel they ought to feel. 'The good of others'

is a magic formula that transforms anything into gold, a formula to berecited as a guarantee of moral glory and as a fumigator for any action, eventhe slaughter of a continent. Your standard of virtue is not an object, notan act, not a principle, but an intention. You need no proof, no reasons, nosuccess, you need not achieve in fact the good of others —all you need toknow is that your motive was the good of others, not your own. Your onlydefinition of the good is a negation: the good is the 'non-good for me.'

"Your code—which boasts that it upholds eternal, absolute, objective moralvalues and scorns the conditional, the relative and the subjective —your codehands out, as its version of the absolute, the following rule of moralconduct: If you wish it, it's evil; if others wish it, it's good; if themotive of your action is your welfare, don't do it; if the motive is thewelfare of others, then anything goes.

"As this double-jointed, double-standard morality splits you in half, soit splits mankind into two enemy camps: one is you, the other is all the restof humanity. You are the only outcast who has no right to wish or live. Youare the only servant, the rest are the masters, you are the only giver, therest are the takers, you are the eternal debtor, the rest are the creditorsnever to be paid off. You must not question their right to your sacrifice, orthe nature of their wishes and their needs: their right is conferred uponthem by a negative, by the fact that they are 'non-you.'

"For those of you who might ask questions, your code provides aconsolation prize and booby-trap: it is for your own happiness, it says, thatyou must serve the happiness of others, the only way to achieve your joy isto give it up to others, the only way to achieve your prosperity is tosurrender your wealth to others, the only way to protect your life is toprotect all men except yourself—and if you find no joy in this procedure, itis your own fault and the proof of your evil; if you were good, you wouldfind your happiness in providing a banquet for others, and your dignity inexisting on such crumbs as they might care to toss you.

"You who have no standard of self-esteem, accept the guilt and dare notask the questions. But you know the unadmitted answer, refusing toacknowledge what you see, what hidden premise moves your world.

You know it, not in honest statement, but as a dark uneasiness within you,while you flounder between guiltily cheating and grudgingly practicing aprinciple too vicious to name.

"I, who do not accept the unearned, neither in values nor in guilt, amhere to ask the questions you evaded. Why is it moral to serve the happinessof others, but not your own? If enjoyment is a value, why is it moral whenexperienced by others, but immoral when experienced by you? If the sensationof eating a cake is a value, why is it an immoral indulgence in your stomach,but a moral goal for you to achieve in the stomach of others? Why is itimmoral for you to desire, but moral for others to do so? Why is it immoralto produce a value and keep it, but moral to give it away? And if it is notmoral for you to keep a value, why is it moral for others to accept it? Ifyou are selfless and virtuous when you give it, are they not selfish andvicious when they take it?

Does virtue consist of serving vice? Is the moral purpose of those who aregood, self-immolation for the sake of those who are evil?

'The answer you evade, the monstrous answer is: No, the takers are notevil, provided they did not earn the value you gave them. It is not immoralfor them to accept it, provided they are unable to produce it, unable todeserve it, unable to give you any value in return. It is not immoral forthem to enjoy it, provided they do not obtain it by right.

"Such is the secret core of your creed, the other half of your doublestandard: it is immoral to live by your own effort, but moral to live by theeffort of others—it is immoral to consume your own product, but moral toconsume the products of others—it is immoral to earn, but moral to mooch—itis the parasites who are the moral justification for the existence of theproducers, but the existence of the parasites is an end in itself—it is evilto profit by achievement, but good to profit by sacrifice—it is evil tocreate your own happiness, but good to enjoy it at the price of the blood ofothers.

"Your code divides mankind into two castes and commands them to live byopposite rules: those who may desire anything and those who may desirenothing, the chosen and the damned, the riders and the carriers, the eatersand the eaten. What standard determines your caste? What passkey admits youto the moral elite? The passkey is lack of value.

"Whatever the value involved, it is your lack of it that gives you a claimupon those who don't lack it. It is your need that gives you a claim torewards. If you are able to satisfy your need, your ability annuls your rightto satisfy it. But a need you are unable to satisfy gives you first right tothe lives of mankind.

"If you succeed, any man who fails is your master; if you fail, any manwho succeeds is your serf. Whether your failure is just or not, whether yourwishes are rational or not, whether your misfortune is undeserved or theresult of your vices, it is misfortune that gives you a right to rewards. Itis pain, regardless of its nature or cause, pain as a primary absolute, thatgives you a mortgage on all of existence.

"If you heal your pain by your own effort, you receive no moral credit:your code regards it scornfully as an act of self-interest. Whatever valueyou seek to acquire, be it wealth or food or love or rights, if you acquireit by means of your virtue, your code does not regard it as a moralacquisition: you occasion no loss to anyone, it is a trade, not alms; apayment, not a sacrifice. The deserved belongs in the selfish, commercialrealm of mutual profit; it is only the undeserved that calls for that moraltransaction which consists of profit to one at the price of disaster to theother. To demand rewards for your virtue is selfish and immoral; it is yourlack of virtue that transforms your demand into a moral right.

"A morality that holds need as a claim, holds emptiness—nonexistence—asits standard of value; it rewards an absence, a defect: weakness, inability,incompetence, suffering, disease, disaster, the lack, the fault, the flaw—thezero.

"Who provides the account to pay these claims? Those who are cursed forbeing non-zeros, each to the extent of his distance from that ideal. Sinceall values are the product of virtues, the degree of your virtue is used asthe measure of your penalty; the degree of your faults is used as the measureof your gain. Your code declares that the rational man must sacrifice himselfto the irrational, the independent man to parasites, the honest man to thedishonest, the man of justice to the unjust, the productive man to thievingloafers, the man of integrity to compromising knaves, the man of self-esteemto sniveling neurotics. Do you wonder at the meanness of soul in those yousee around you? The man who achieves these virtues will not accept your moralcode; the man who accepts your moral code will not achieve these virtues.

"Under a morality of sacrifice, the first value you sacrifice is morality;the next is self-esteem. When need is the standard, every man is both victimand parasite. As a victim, he must labor to fill the needs of others, leavinghimself in the position of a parasite whose needs must be filled by others.He cannot approach his fellow men except in one of two disgraceful roles: heis both a beggar and a sucker.

"You fear the man who has a dollar less than you, that dollar isrightfully his, he makes you feel like a moral defrauder. You hate the manwho has a dollar more than you, that dollar is rightfully yours, he makes youfeel that you are morally defrauded. The man below is a source of your guilt,the man above is a source of your frustration. You do not know what tosurrender or demand, when to give and when to grab, what pleasure in life isrightfully yours and what debt is still unpaid to others—you struggle toevade, as 'theory,' the knowledge that by the moral standard you've acceptedyou are guilty every moment of your life, there is no mouthful of food youswallow that is not needed by someone somewhere on earth—and you give up theproblem in blind resentment, you conclude that moral perfection is not to beachieved or desired, that you will muddle through by snatching as snatch canand by avoiding the eyes of the young, of those who look at you as if self-esteem were possible and they expected you to have it Guilt is all that youretain within your soul—and so does every other man, as he goes past,avoiding your eyes. Do you wonder why your morality has not achievedbrotherhood on earth or the good will of man to man?

"The justification of sacrifice, that your morality propounds, is morecorrupt than the corruption it purports to justify. The motive of yoursacrifice, it tells you, should be love—the love you ought to feel for everyman. A morality that professes the belief that the values of the spirit aremore precious than matter, a morality that teaches you to scorn a whore whogives her body indiscriminately to all men—this same morality demands thatyou surrender your soul to promiscuous love for all comers.

"As there can be no causeless wealth, so there can be no causeless love orany sort of causeless emotion. An emotion is a response to a fact of reality,an estimate dictated by your standards. To love is to value.

The man who tells you that it is possible to value without values, to lovethose whom you appraise as worthless, is the man who tells you that it ispossible to grow rich by consuming without producing and that paper money isas valuable as gold.

"Observe that he does not expect you to feel a causeless fear. When hiskind get into power, they are expert at contriving means of terror, at givingyou ample cause to feel the fear by which they desire to rule you. But whenit comes to love, the highest of emotions, you permit them to shriek at youaccusingly that you are a moral delinquent if you're incapable of feelingcauseless love. When a man feels fear without reason, you call him to theattention of a psychiatrist; you are not 1034 so careful to protect themeaning, the nature and the dignity of love.

"Love is the expression of one's values, the greatest reward you can earnfor the moral qualities you have achieved in your character and person, theemotional price paid by one man for the joy he receives from the virtues ofanother. Your morality demands that you divorce your love from values andhand it down to any vagrant, not as response to his worth, but as response tohis need, not as reward, but as alms, not as a payment for virtues, but as ablank check on vices. Your morality tells you that the purpose of love is toset you free of the bonds of morality, that love is superior to moraljudgment, that true love transcends, forgives and survives every manner ofevil in Its object, and the greater the love the greater the depravity itpermits to the loved. To love a man for his virtues is paltry and human, ittells you; to love him for his flaws is divine. To love those who are worthyof it is self-interest; to love the unworthy is sacrifice. You owe your loveto 'those who don't deserve it, and the less they deserve it, the more loveyou owe them—the more loathsome the object, the nobler your love—the moreunfastidious your love, the greater your virtue—and if you can bring yoursoul to the state of a dump heap that welcomes anything on equal terms, if

you can cease to value moral values, you have achieved the state of moralperfection.

"Such is your morality of sacrifice and such are the twin ideals itoffers: to refashion the life of your body in the image of a humanstockyards, and the life of your spirit in the image of a dump.

"Such was your goal—and you've reached it. Why do you now moan complaintsabout man's impotence and the futility of human aspirations? Because you wereunable to prosper by seeking destruction? Because you were unable to find joyby worshipping pain? Because you were unable to live by holding death as yourstandard of value?

"The degree of your ability to live was the degree to which you broke yourmoral code, yet you believe that those who preach it are friends of humanity,you damn yourself and dare not question their motives or their goals. Take alook at them now, when you face your last choice—and if you choose to perish,do so with full knowledge of how cheaply how small an enemy has claimed yourlife.

"The mystics of both schools, who preach the creed of sacrifice, are germsthat attack you through a single sore: your fear of relying on your mind.They tell you that they possess a means of knowledge higher than the mind, amode of consciousness superior to reason—like a special pull with somebureaucrat of the universe who gives them secret tips withheld from others.The mystics of spirit declare that they possess an extra sense you lack: thisspecial sixth sense consists of contradicting the whole of the knowledge ofyour five. The mystics of muscle do not bother to assert any claim toextrasensory perception: they merely declare that your senses are not valid,and that their wisdom consists of perceiving your blindness by some manner ofunspecified means. Both kinds demand that you invalidate your ownconsciousness and surrender yourself into their power. They offer you, asproof of their superior knowledge, the fact that they assert the opposite ofeverything you know, and as proof of their superior ability to deal withexistence, the fact that they lead you to misery, self-sacrifice, starvation,destruction.

"They claim that they perceive a mode of being superior to your existenceon this earth. The mystics of spirit call it 'another dimension,' whichconsists of denying dimensions. The mystics of muscle call it 'the future,'which consists of denying the present. To exist is to possess identity. Whatidentity are they able to give to their superior realm?

They keep telling you what it is not, but never tell you what it is. Alltheir identifications consist of negating: God is that which no human mindcan know, they say—and proceed to demand that you consider it knowledge—Godis non-man, heaven is non-earth, soul is non-body, virtue is non-profit, A isnon-A, perception is non-sensory, knowledge is non-reason. Their definitionsare not acts of defining, but of wiping out.

"It is only the metaphysics of a leech that would cling to the idea of auniverse where a zero is a standard of identification. A leech would want toseek escape from the necessity to name its own nature—escape from thenecessity to know that the substance on which it builds its private universeis blood.

"What is the nature of that superior world to which they sacrifice theworld that exists? The mystics of spirit curse matter, the mystics of musclecurse profit. The first wish men to profit by renouncing the earth, thesecond wish men to inherit the earth by renouncing all profit. Their non-material, non-profit worlds are realms where rivers run with milk and coffee,where wine spurts from rocks at their command, where pastry drops on themfrom clouds at the price of opening their mouth. On this material, profit-chasing earth, an enormous investment of virtue—of intelligence, integrity,energy, skill—is required to construct a railroad to carry them the distance

of one mile; in their nonmaterial, non-profit world, they travel from planetto planet at the cost of a wish. If an honest person asks them: 'How?'—theyanswer with righteous scorn that a 'how' is the concept of vulgar realists;the concept of superior spirits is 'Somehow.' On this earth restricted bymatter and profit, rewards are achieved by thought; in a world set free ofsuch restrictions, rewards are achieved by wishing.

"And that is the whole of their shabby secret. The secret of all theiresoteric philosophies, of all their dialectics and super-senses, of theirevasive eyes and snarling words, the secret for which they destroycivilization, language, industries and lives, the secret for which theypierce "their own eyes and eardrums, grind out their senses, blank out theirminds, the purpose for which they dissolve the absolutes of reason, logic,matter, existence, reality—is to erect upon that plastic fog a single holyabsolute: their Wish.

"The restriction they seek to escape is the law of identity. The freedomthey seek is freedom from the fact that an A will remain an A, no matter whattheir tears or tantrums—that a river will not bring them milk, no matter whattheir hunger—that water will not run uphill, no matter what comforts theycould gain if it did, and if they want to lift it to the roof of askyscraper, they must do it by a process of thought and labor, in which thenature of an inch of pipe line counts, but their feelings do not—that theirfeelings are impotent to alter the course of a single speck of dust in spaceor the nature of any action they have committed.

"Those who tell you that man is unable to perceive a reality undistortedby his senses, mean that they are unwilling to perceive a reality undistortedby their feelings. 'Things as they are' are things as perceived by your mind;divorce them from reason and they become 'things as perceived by yourwishes.'

"There is no honest revolt against reason—and when you accept any part oftheir creed, your motive is to get away with something your reason would notpermit you to attempt. The freedom you seek is freedom from the fact that ifyou stole your wealth, you are a scoundrel, no matter how much you give tocharity or how many prayers you recite—that if you sleep with sluts, you'renot a worthy husband, no matter how anxiously you feel that you love yourwife next morning—that you are an entity, not a series of random piecesscattered through a universe where nothing sticks and nothing commits you toanything., the universe of a child's nightmare where identities switch andswim, where the rotter and the hero are interchangeable parts arbitrarilyassumed at will—that you are a man—that you are an entity—that you are.

"No matter how eagerly you claim that the goal of your mystic wishing is ahigher mode of life, the rebellion against identity is the wish for non-existence. The desire not to be anything is the desire not to be.

"Your teachers, the mystics of both schools, have reversed causality intheir consciousness, then strive to reverse it in existence. They take theiremotions as a cause, and their mind as a passive effect. They make theiremotions their tool for perceiving reality. They hold their desires as anirreducible primary, as a fact superseding all facts. An honest man does notdesire until he has identified the object of his desire. He says: 'It is,therefore I want it.' They say: 'I want it, therefore it is.'

"They want to cheat the axiom of existence and consciousness, they wanttheir consciousness to be an instrument not of perceiving but of creatingexistence, and existence to be not the object but the subject of theirconsciousness—they want to be that God they created in their image andlikeness, who creates a universe out of a void by means of an arbitrary whim.But reality is not to be cheated. What they achieve is the opposite of theirdesire. They want an omnipotent power over existence; instead, they lose the

power of their consciousness. By refusing to know, they condemn themselves tothe horror of a perpetual unknown.

"Those irrational wishes that draw you to their creed, those emotions youworship as an idol, on whose altar you sacrifice the earth, that dark,incoherent passion within you, which you take as the voice of God or of yourglands, is nothing more than the corpse of your mind.

An emotion that clashes with your reason, an emotion that you cannotexplain or control, is only the carcass of that stale thinking which youforbade your mind to revise.

"Whenever you committed the evil of refusing to think and to see, ofexempting from the absolute of reality some one small wish of yours, wheneveryou chose to say: Let me withdraw from the judgment of reason the cookies Istole, or the existence of God, let me have my one irrational whim and I willbe a man of reason about all else—that was the act of subverting yourconsciousness, the act of corrupting your mind. Your mind then became a fixedjury who takes orders from a secret underworld, whose verdict distorts theevidence to fit an absolute it dares not touch—and a censored reality is theresult, a splintered reality where the bits you chose to see are floatingamong the chasms of those you didn't, held together by that embalming fluidof the mind which is an emotion exempted from thought.

"The links you strive to drown are causal connections. The enemy you seekto defeat is the law of causality: it permits you no miracles.

The law of causality is the law of identity applied to action. Al!

actions are caused by entities. The nature of an action is caused anddetermined by the nature of the entities that act; a thing cannot act incontradiction to its nature. An action not caused by an entity would becaused by a zero, which would mean a zero controlling a thing, a nonentitycontrolling an entity, the non-existent ruling the existent—which is theuniverse of your teachers' desire, the cause of their doctrines of causelessaction, the reason of their revolt against reason, the goal of theirmorality, their politics, their economics, the ideal they strive for: thereign of the zero.

"The law of identity does not permit you to have your cake and eat it,too. The law of causality does not permit you to eat your cake before youhave it. But if you drown both laws in the blanks of your mind, if youpretend to yourself and to others that you don't see—then you can try toproclaim your right to eat your cake today and mine tomorrow, you can preachthat the way to have a cake is to eat it first, before you bake it, that theway to produce is to start by consuming, that "all wishers have an equalclaim to all things, since nothing is caused by anything. The corollary ofthe causeless in matter is the unearned in spirit.

"Whenever you rebel against causality, your motive is the fraudulentdesire, not to escape it, but worse: to reverse it. You want unearned love,as if love, the effect, could give you personal value, the cause—

you want unearned admiration, as if admiration, the effect, could give youvirtue, the cause—you want unearned wealth, as if wealth, the effect, couldgive you ability, the cause—you plead for mercy, mercy, not justice, as if anunearned forgiveness could wipe out the cause of your plea. And to indulgeyour ugly little shams, you support the doctrines of your teachers, whilethey run hog-wild proclaiming that spending, the effect, creates riches, thecause, that machinery, the effect, creates intelligence, the cause, that yoursexual desires, the effect, create your philosophical values, the cause.

"Who pays for the orgy? Who causes the causeless? Who are the victims,condemned to remain unacknowledged and to perish in silence, lest their agonydisturb your pretense that they do not exist? We are, we, the men of themind.

"We are the cause of all the values that you covet, we who perform theprocess of thinking, which is the process of defining identity anddiscovering causal connections. We taught you to know, to speak, to produce,to desire, to love. You who abandon reason—were it not for us who preserveit, you would not be able to fulfill or even to conceive your wishes. Youwould not be able to desire the clothes that had not been made, theautomobile that had not been invented, the money that had not been devised,as exchange for goods that did not exist, the admiration that had not beenexperienced for men who had achieved nothing, the love that belongs andpertains only to those who preserve their capacity to think, to choose, tovalue.

"You—who leap like a savage out of the jungle of your feelings into theFifth Avenue of our New York and proclaim that you want to keep the electriclights, but to destroy the generators—it is our wealth that you use whiledestroying us, it is our values that you use while damning us, it is ourlanguage that you use while denying the mind.

"Just as your mystics of spirit invented their heaven in the image of ourearth, omitting our existence, and promised you rewards created by miracleout of non-matter—so your modern mystics of muscle omit our existence andpromise you a heaven where matter shapes itself of its own causeless willinto all the rewards desired by your non-mind.

"For centuries, the mystics of spirit had existed by running a protectionracket—by making life on earth unbearable, then charging you for consolationand relief, by forbidding all the virtues that make existence possible, thenriding on the shoulders of your guilt, by declaring production and joy to besins, then collecting blackmail from the sinners. We, the men of the mind,were the unnamed victims of their creed, we who were willing to break theirmoral code and to bear damnation for the sin of reason—we who thought andacted, while they wished and prayed—we who were moral outcasts, we who werebootleggers of life when life was held to be a crime—while they basked inmoral glory for the virtue of surpassing material greed and of distributingin selfless charity the material goods produced by—blank-out.

"Now we are chained and commanded to produce by savages who do not grantus even the identification of sinners—by savages who proclaim that we do notexist, then threaten to deprive us of the life we don't possess, if we failto provide them with the goods we don't produce. Now we are expected tocontinue running railroads and to know the minute when a train will arriveafter crossing the span of a continent, we are expected to continue runningsteel mills and to know the molecular structure of every drop of metal in thecables of your bridges and in the body of the airplanes that support you inmid-air—

while the tribes of your grotesque little mystics of muscle fight over thecarcass of our world, gibbering in sounds of non-language that there are noprinciples, no absolutes, no knowledge, no mind.

"Dropping below the level of a savage, who believes that the magic wordshe utters have the power to alter reality, they believe that reality can bealtered by the power of the words they do not utter—and their magic tool isthe blank-out, the pretense that nothing can come into existence past thevoodoo of their refusal to identify it.

"As they feed on stolen wealth in body, so they feed on stolen concepts inmind, and proclaim that honesty consists of refusing to know that one isstealing. As they use effects while denying causes, so they use our conceptswhile denying the roots and the existence of the concepts they are using. Asthey seek, not to build, but to take over industrial plants, so they seek,not to think, but to take over human thinking.

"As they proclaim that the only requirement for running a factory is theability to turn the cranks of the machines, and blank out the question of who

created the factory—so they proclaim that there are no entities, that nothingexists but motion, and blank out the fact that motion presupposes the thingwhich moves, that without the concept of entity, there can be no such conceptas 'motion.' As they proclaim their right to consume the unearned, and blankout the question of who's to produce it—so they proclaim that there is no lawof identity, that nothing exists but change, and blank out the fact thatchange presupposes the concepts of what changes, from what and to what, thatwithout the law of identity no such concept as 'change' is possible. As theyrob an industrialist while denying his value, so they seek to seize powerover all of existence while denying that existence exists.

" 'We know that we know nothing, ' they chatter, blanking out the fact thatthey are claiming knowledge—'There are no absolutes,' they chatter, blankingout the fact that they are uttering an absolute—'You cannot prove that youexist or that you're conscious,' they chatter, blanking out the fact thatproof presupposes existence, consciousness and a complex chain of knowledge:the existence of something to know, of a consciousness able to know it, andof a knowledge that has learned to distinguish between such concepts as theproved and the unproved.

"When a savage who has not learned to speak declares that existence mustbe proved, he is asking you to prove it by means of nonexistence—when hedeclares that your consciousness must be proved, he is asking you to prove itby means of unconsciousness—he is asking you to step into a void outside ofexistence and consciousness to give him proof of both—he is asking you tobecome a zero gaining knowledge about a zero, "When he declares that an axiomis a matter of arbitrary choice and he doesn't choose to accept the axiomthat he exists, he blanks out the fact that he has accepted it by utteringthat sentence, that the only way to reject it is to shut one's mouth, expoundno theories and die.

"An axiom is a statement that identifies the base of knowledge and of anyfurther statement pertaining to that knowledge, a statement necessarilycontained in all others, whether any particular speaker chooses to identifyit or not. An axiom is a proposition that defeats its opponents by the factthat they have to accept it and use it in the process of any attempt to denyit. Let the caveman who does not choose to accept the axiom of identity, tryto present his theory without using the concept of identity or any conceptderived from it—let the anthropoid who does not choose to accept theexistence of nouns, try to devise a language without nouns, adjectives orverbs—let the witchdoctor who does not choose to accept the validity ofsensory perception, try to prove it without using the data he obtained bysensory perception —let the head-hunter who does not choose to accept thevalidity of logic, try to prove it without using logic—let the pigmy whoproclaims that a skyscraper needs no foundation after it reaches its fiftiethstory, yank the base from under his building, not yours—let the cannibal whosnarls that the freedom of man's mind was needed to create an industrialcivilization, but is not needed to maintain it, be given an arrowhead andbearskin, not a university chair of economics.

"Do you think they are taking you back to dark ages? They are taking youback to darker ages than any your history has known. Their goal is not theera of pre-science, but the era of pre-language. Their purpose is to depriveyou of the concept on which man's mind, his life and his culture depend: theconcept of an objective reality. Identify the development of a humanconsciousness—and you will know the purpose of their creed.

"A savage is a being who has not grasped that A is A and that reality isreal. He has arrested his mind at the level of a baby's, at the stage when aconsciousness acquires its initial sensory perceptions and has not learned todistinguish solid objects. It is to a baby that the world appears as a blurof motion, without things that move—and the birth of his mind is the day when

he grasps that the streak that keeps flickering past him is his mother andthe whirl beyond her is a curtain, that the two are solid entities andneither can turn into the other, that they are what they are, that theyexist. The day when he grasps that matter has no volition is the day when hegrasps that he has—and this is his birth as a human being. The day when hegrasps that the reflection he sees in a mirror is not a delusion, that it isreal, but it is not himself, that the mirage he sees in a desert is not adelusion, that the air and the light rays that cause it are real, but it isnot a city, it is a city's reflection—the day when he grasps that he is not apassive recipient of the sensations of any given moment, that his senses donot provide him with automatic knowledge in separate snatches independent ofcontext, but only with the material of knowledge, which his mind must learnto integrate—the day when he grasps that his senses cannot deceive him, thatphysical objects cannot act without causes, that his organs of perception arephysical and have no volition, no power to invent or to distort, that theevidence they give him is an absolute, but his mind must learn to understandit, his mind must discover the nature, the causes, the full context of hissensory material, his mind must identify the things that he perceives—that isthe day of his birth as a thinker and scientist.

"We are the men who reach that day; you are the men who choose to reach itpartly; a savage is a man who never does.

"To a savage, the world is a place of unintelligible miracles whereanything is possible to inanimate matter and nothing is possible to him.

His world is not the unknown, but that irrational horror: the unknowable.He believes that physical objects are endowed with a mysterious volition,moved by causeless, unpredictable whims, while he is a helpless pawn at themercy of forces beyond his control. He believes that nature is ruled bydemons who possess an omnipotent power and that reality is their fluidplaything, where they can turn his bowl of meal into a snake and his wifeinto a beetle at any moment, where the A he has never discovered can be anynon-A they choose, where the only knowledge he possesses is that he must notattempt to know. He can count on nothing, he can only wish, and he spends hislife on wishing, on begging his demons to grant him his wishes by thearbitrary power of their will, giving them credit when they do, taking theblame when they don't, offering them sacrifices in token of his gratitude andsacrifices in token of his guilt, crawling on his belly in fear and worshipof sun and moon and wind and rain and of any thug who announces himself astheir spokesman, provided his words are unintelligible and his masksufficiently frightening—he wishes, begs and crawls, and dies, leaving you,as a record of his view of existence, the distorted monstrosities of hisidols, part-man, part-animal, part-spider, the embodiments of the world ofnon-A.

"His is the intellectual state of your modern teachers and his is theworld to which they want to bring you.

"If you wonder by what means they propose to do it, walk into any collegeclassroom and you will hear your professors teaching your children that mancan be certain of nothing, that his consciousness has no validity whatever,that he can learn no facts and no laws of existence, that he's incapable ofknowing an objective reality. What, then, is his standard of knowledge andtruth? Whatever others believe, is their answer. There is no knowledge, theyteach, there's only faith: your belief that you exist is an act of faith, nomore valid than another's faith in his right to kill you; the axioms ofscience are an act of faith, no more valid than a mystic's faith inrevelations; the belief that electric light can be produced by a generator isan act of faith, no more valid than the belief that it can be produced by arabbit's foot kissed under a stepladder on the first of the moon—truth iswhatever people want it to be, and people are everyone except yourself;

reality is whatever people choose to say it is, there are no objective facts,there are only people's arbitrary wishes—a man who seeks knowledge in alaboratory by means of test tubes and logic is an old-fashioned,superstitious fool; a true scientist is a man who goes around taking publicpolls—and if it weren't for the selfish greed of the manufacturers of steelgirders, who have a vested interest in obstructing the progress of science,you would learn that New York City does not exist, because a poll of theentire population of the world would tell you by a landslide majority thattheir beliefs forbid its existence.

"For centuries, the mystics of spirit have proclaimed that faith issuperior to reason, but have not dared deny the existence of reason.

Their heirs and product, the mystics of muscle, have completed their joband achieved their dream: they proclaim that everything is faith, and call ita revolt against believing. As revolt against unproved assertions, theyproclaim that nothing can be proved; as revolt against supernaturalknowledge, they proclaim that no knowledge is possible; as revolt against theenemies of science, they proclaim that science is superstition; as revoltagainst the enslavement of the mind, they proclaim that there is no mind.

"If you surrender your power to perceive, if you accept the switch of yourstandard from the objective to the collective and wait for mankind to tellyou what to think, you will find another switch taking place before the eyesyou have renounced: you will find that your teachers become the rulers of thecollective, and if you then refuse to obey them, protesting that they are notthe whole of mankind, they will answer: 'By what means do you know that weare not? Are, brother?

Where did you get that old-fashioned term?'

"If you doubt that such is their purpose, observe with what passionateconsistency the mystics of muscle are striving to make you forget that aconcept such as 'mind' has ever existed. Observe the twists of undefinedverbiage, the words with rubber meanings, the terms left floating inmidstream, by means of which they try to get around the recognition of theconcept of 'thinking.' Your consciousness, they tell you, consists of'reflexes,' 'reactions,' 'experiences,' 'urges,' and 'drives'

—and refuse to identify the means by which they acquired that knowledge,to identify the act they are performing when they tell it or the act you areperforming when you listen. Words have the power to 'condition' you, they sayand refuse to identify the reason why words have the power to change your—blank-out. A student reading a book understands it through a process of—blank-out. A scientist working on an invention is engaged in the activity of—blank-out. A psychologist helping a neurotic to solve a problem and untanglea conflict, does it by means of—blank-out. An industrialist—blank-out—thereis no such person. A factory is a 'natural resource,' like a tree, a rock ora mud puddle.

"The problem of production, they tell you, has been solved and deserves nostudy or concern; the only problem left for your 'reflexes' to solve is nowthe problem of distribution. Who solved the problem of production? Humanity,they answer. What was the solution? The goods are here. How did they gethere? Somehow. What caused it? Nothing has causes.

"They proclaim that every man born is entitled to exist without labor and,the laws of reality to the contrary notwithstanding, is entitled to receivehis 'minimum sustenance'—his food, his clothes, his shelter—with no effort onhis part, as his due and his birthright. To receive it—from whom? Blank-out.Every man, they announce, owns an equal share of the technological benefitscreated in the world.

Created—by whom? Blank-out. Frantic cowards who posture as defenders ofindustrialists now define the purpose of economics as 'an adjustment betweenthe unlimited desires of men and the goods supplied in limited quantity.'

Supplied—by whom? Blank-out. Intellectual hoodlums who pose as professors,shrug away the thinkers of the past by declaring that their social theorieswere based on the impractical assumption that man was a rational being—butsince men are not rational, they declare, there ought to be established asystem that will make it possible for them to exist while being irrational,which means: while defying reality. Who will make it possible? Blank-out. Anystray mediocrity rushes into print with plans to control the production ofmankind—and whoever agrees or disagrees with his statistics, no one questionshis right to enforce his plans by means of a gun. Enforce—on whom? Blank-out.Random females with causeless incomes flitter on trips around the globe andreturn to deliver the message that the backward peoples of the world demand ahigher standard of living. Demand—of whom? Blank-out.

"And to forestall any inquiry into the cause of the difference between ajungle village and New York City, they resort to the ultimate obscenity ofexplaining man's industrial progress—skyscrapers, cable bridges, powermotors, railroad trains—by declaring that man is an animal who possesses an'instinct of tool-making.'

"Did you wonder what is wrong with the world? You are now seeing theclimax of the creed of the uncaused and unearned. All your gangs of mystics,of spirit or muscle, are fighting one another for power to rule you, snarlingthat love is the solution for all the problems of your spirit and that a whipis the solution for all the problems of your body—

you who have agreed to have no mind. Granting man less dignity than theygrant to cattle, ignoring what an animal trainer could tell them—that noanimal can be trained by fear, that a tortured elephant will trample itstorturer, but will not work for him or carry his burdens —they expect man tocontinue to produce electronic tubes, supersonic airplanes, atom-smashingengines and interstellar telescopes, with his ration of meat for reward and alash on his back for incentive.

"Make no mistake about the character of mystics. To undercut yourconsciousness has always been their only purpose throughout the ages —andpower, the power to rule you by force, has always been their only lust.

"From the rites of the jungle witch-doctors, which distorted reality intogrotesque absurdities, stunted the minds of their victims and kept them interror of the supernatural for stagnant stretches of centuries—

to the supernatural doctrines of the Middle Ages, which kept men huddlingon the mud floors of their hovels, in terror that the devil might steal thesoup they had worked eighteen hours to earn—to the seedy little smilingprofessor who assures you that your brain has no capacity to think, that youhave no means of perception and must blindly obey the omnipotent will of thatsupernatural force: Society—all of it is the same performance for the sameand only purpose: to reduce you to the kind of pulp that has surrendered thevalidity of its consciousness.

"But it cannot be done to you without your consent. If you permit it to bedone, you deserve it.

"When you listen to a mystic's harangue on the impotence of the human mindand begin to doubt your consciousness, not his, when you permit yourprecariously semi-rational state to be shaken by any assertion and decide itis safer to trust his superior certainty and knowledge, the joke is on bothof you: your sanction is the only source of certainty he has. Thesupernatural power that a mystic dreads, the unknowable spirit he worships,the consciousness he considers omnipotent is—yours.

A mystic is a man who surrendered his mind at its first encounter with theminds of others. Somewhere in. the distant reaches of his childhood, when hisown understanding of reality clashed with the assertions of others, withtheir arbitrary orders and contradictory demands, he gave in to so craven a

fear of dependence that he renounced his rational faculty. At the crossroadsof the choice between 'I know' and 'They say,'

he chose the authority of others, he chose to submit rather than tounderstand, to believe rather than to think. Faith in the supernatural beginsas faith in the superiority of others. His surrender took the form of thefeeling that he must hide his lack of understanding, that others possess somemysterious knowledge of which he alone is deprived, that reality is whateverthey want it to be, through some means forever denied to him.

"From then on, afraid to think, he is left at the mercy of unidentifiedfeelings. His feelings become his only guide, his only remnant of personalidentity, he clings to them with ferocious possessiveness—

and whatever thinking he does is devoted to the struggle of hiding fromhimself that the nature of his feelings is terror.

"When a mystic declares that he feels the existence of a power superior toreason, he feels it all right, but that power is not an omniscient super-spirit of the universe, it is the consciousness of any passer-by to whom hehas surrendered his own. A mystic is driven by the urge to impress, to cheat,to flatter, to deceive, to force that omnipotent consciousness of others.'They' are his only key to reality, he feels that he cannot exist save byharnessing their mysterious power and extorting their unaccountable consent,'They' are his only means of perception and, like a blind man who depends onthe sight of a dog, he feels he must leash them in order to live. To controlthe consciousness of others becomes his only passion; power-lust is a weedthat grows only in the vacant lots of an abandoned mind.

"Every dictator is a mystic, and every mystic is a potential dictator.

A mystic craves obedience from men, not their agreement. He wants them tosurrender their consciousness to his assertions, his edicts, his wishes, hiswhims—as his consciousness is surrendered to theirs. He wants to deal withmen by means of faith and force—he finds no satisfaction in their consent ifhe must earn it by means of facts and reason. Reason is the enemy he dreadsand, simultaneously, considers precarious; reason, to him, is a means ofdeception; he feels that men possess some power more potent than reason—andonly their causeless belief or their forced obedience can give him a sense ofsecurity, a proof that he has gained control of the mystic endowment helacked.

His lust is to command, not to convince: conviction requires an act ofindependence and rests on the absolute of an objective reality. What he seeksis power over reality and over men's means of perceiving it, their mind, thepower to interpose his will between existence and consciousness, as if, byagreeing to fake the reality he orders them to fake, men would, in fact,create it.

"Just as the mystic is a parasite in matter, who expropriates the wealthcreated by others—just as he is a parasite in spirit, who

plunders the ideas created by others—so he falls below the level of alunatic who creates his own distortion of reality, to the level of a parasiteof lunacy who seeks a distortion created by others.

"There is only one state that fulfills the mystic's longing for infinity,non-causality, non-identity: death. No matter what unintelligible causes heascribes to his incommunicable feelings, whoever rejects reality rejectsexistence—and the feelings that move him from then on are hatred for all thevalues of man's life, and lust for all the evils that destroy it, A mysticrelishes the spectacle of suffering, of poverty, subservience and terror;these give him a feeling of triumph, a proof of the defeat of rationalreality. But no other reality exists.

"No matter whose welfare he professes to serve, be it the welfare of Godor of that disembodied gargoyle he describes as 'The People, '

no matter what ideal he proclaims in terms of some supernatural dimension-in fact, in reality, on earth, his ideal is death, his craving is to kill,his only satisfaction is to torture.

"Destruction is the only end that the mystics' creed has ever achieved, asit is the only end that you see them achieving today, and if the ravageswrought by their acts have not made them question their doctrines, if theyprofess to be moved by love, yet are not deterred by piles of human corpses,it is because the truth about their souls is worse than the obscene excuseyou have allowed them, the excuse that the end justifies the means and thatthe horrors they practice are means to nobler ends. The truth is that thosehorrors are their ends.

"You who're depraved enough to believe that you could adjust yourself to amystic's dictatorship and could please him by obeying his orders—there is noway to please him; when you obey, he will reverse his orders; he seeksobedience for the sake of obedience and destruction for the sake ofdestruction. You who are craven enough to believe that you can make termswith a mystic by giving in to his extortions-there is no way to buy him off, the bribe he wants is your life, as slowlyor as fast as you are willing to give it in—and the monster he seeks to bribeis the hidden blank-out in his mind, which drives him to kill in order not tolearn that the death he desires is his own.

"You who are innocent enough to believe that the forces let loose in yourworld today are moved by greed for material plunder—the mystics' scramble forspoils is only a screen to conceal from their mind the nature of theirmotive. Wealth is a means of human life, and they clamor for wealth inimitation of living beings, to pretend to themselves that they desire tolive. But their swinish indulgence in plundered luxury is not enjoyment, itis escape. They do not want to own your fortune, they want you to lose it;they do not want to succeed, they want you to fail; they do not want to live,they want you to die; they desire nothing, they hate existence, and they keeprunning, each trying not to learn that the object of his hatred is himself.

"You who've never grasped the nature of evil, you who describe them as'misguided idealists'—may the God you invented forgive you!—

they are the essence of evil, they, those anti-living objects who seek, bydevouring the world, to fill the selfless zero of their soul. It is not yourwealth that they're after. Theirs is a conspiracy against the mind, whichmeans: against life and man.

"It is a conspiracy without leader or direction, and the random littlethugs of the moment who cash in on the agony of one land or another arechance scum riding the torrent from the broken dam of the sewer of centuries,from the reservoir of hatred for reason, for logic, for ability, forachievement, for joy, stored by every whining anti-human who ever preachedthe superiority of the 'heart' over the mind.

"It is a conspiracy of all those who seek, not to live, but to get awaywith living, those who seek to cut just one small corner of reality and aredrawn, by feeling, to all the others who are busy cutting other corners—aconspiracy that unites by links of evasion all those who pursue a zero as avalue: the professor who, unable to think, takes pleasure in crippling themind of his students, the businessman who, to protect his stagnation, takespleasure in chaining the ability of competitors, the neurotic who, to defendhis self-loathing, takes pleasure in breaking men of self-esteem, theincompetent who takes pleasure in defeating achievement, the mediocrity whotakes pleasure in demolishing greatness, the eunuch who takes pleasure in thecastration of all pleasure—and all their intellectual munition-makers, allthose who preach that the immolation of virtue will transform vices intovirtue.

Death is the premise at the root of their theories, death is the goal oftheir actions in practice—and you are the last of their victims.

"We, who were the living buffers between you and the nature of your creed,are no longer there to save you from the effects of your chosen beliefs. Weare no longer willing to pay with our lives the debts you incurred in yoursor the moral deficit piled up by all the generations behind you. You had beenliving on borrowed time—and I am the man who has called in the loan.

"I am the man whose existence your blank-outs were intended to permit youto ignore. I am the man whom you did not want either to live or to die. Youdid not want me to live, because you were afraid of knowing that I carriedthe responsibility you dropped and that your lives depended upon me; you didnot want me to die, because you knew it.

"Twelve years ago, when I worked in your world, I was an inventor.

I was one of a profession that came last in human history and will befirst to vanish on the way back to the sub-human. An inventor is a man whoasks 'Why?' of the universe and lets nothing stand between the answer and hismind.

"Like the man who discovered the use of steam or the man who discoveredthe use of oil, I discovered a source of energy which was available since thebirth of the globe, but which men had not known how to use except as anobject of worship, of terror and of legends about a thundering god. Icompleted the experimental model of a motor that would have made a fortunefor me and for those who had hired me, a motor that would have raised theefficiency of every human installation using power and would have added thegift of higher productivity to every hour you spend at earning your living.

"Then, one night at a factory meeting, I heard myself sentenced to deathby reason of my achievement. I heard three parasites assert that my brain andmy life were their property, that my right to exist was conditional anddepended on the satisfaction of their desires. The purpose of my ability,they said, was to serve the needs of those who were less able. I had no rightto live, they said, by reason of my competence for living; their right tolive was unconditional, by reason of their incompetence.

"Then I saw what was wrong with the world, I saw what destroyed men andnations, and where the battle for life had to be fought. I saw that the enemywas an inverted morality—and that my sanction was its only power. I saw thatevil was impotent—that evil was the irrational, the blind, the anti-real—andthat the only weapon of its triumph was the willingness of the good to serveit. Just as the parasites around me were proclaiming their helplessdependence on my mind and were expecting me voluntarily to accept a slaverythey had no power to enforce, just as they were counting on my self-immolation to provide them with the means of their plan—so throughout theworld and throughout men's history, in every version and form, from theextortions of loafing relatives to the atrocities of collectivized countries,it is the good, the able, the men of reason, who act as their own destroyers,who transfuse to evil the blood of their virtue and let evil transmit to themthe poison of destruction, thus gaining for evil the power of survival, andfor their own values—the impotence of death.

I saw that there comes a point, in the defeat of any man of virtue, whenhis own consent is needed for evil to win—and that no manner of injury doneto him by others can succeed if he chooses to withhold his consent. I sawthat I could put an end to your outrages by pronouncing a single word in mymind. I pronounced it. The word was 'No.'

"I quit that factory. I quit your world. I made it my job to warn yourvictims and to give them the method and the weapon to fight you. The methodwas to refuse to deflect retribution. The weapon was justice.

"If you want to know what you lost when I quit and when my strikersdeserted your world—stand on an empty stretch of soil in a wilderness

unexplored by men and ask yourself what manner of survival you would achieveand how long you would last if you refused to think, with no one around toteach you the motions, or, if you chose to think, how much your mind would beable to discover—ask yourself how many independent conclusions you havereached in the course of your life and how much of your time was spent onperforming the actions you learned from others—ask yourself whether you wouldbe able to discover how to till the soil and grow your food, whether youwould be able to invent a wheel, a lever, an induction coil, a generator, anelectronic tube—then decide whether men of ability are exploiters who live bythe fruit of your labor and rob you of the wealth that you produce, andwhether you dare to believe that you possess the power to enslave them. Letyour women take a look at a jungle female with her shriveled face andpendulous breasts, as she sits grinding meal in a bowl, hour after hour,century by century—then let them ask themselves whether their 'instinct oftool-making' will provide them with their electric refrigerators, theirwashing machines and vacuum cleaners, and, if not, whether they care todestroy those who provided it all, but not 'by instinct.'

"Take a look around you, you savages who stutter that ideas are created bymen's means of production, that a machine is not the product of humanthought, but a mystical power that produces human thinking. You have neverdiscovered the industrial age—and you cling to the morality of the barbarianeras when a miserable form of human subsistence was produced by the muscularlabor of slaves. Every mystic had always longed for slaves, to protect himfrom the material reality he dreaded. But you, you grotesque little atavists,stare blindly at the skyscrapers and smokestacks around you and dream ofenslaving the material providers who are scientists, inventors,industrialists.

When you clamor for public ownership of the means of production, you areclamoring for public ownership of the mind. I have taught my strikers thatthe answer you deserve is only: 'Try and get it.'

"You proclaim yourself unable to harness the forces of inanimate matter,yet propose to harness the minds of men who are able to achieve the feats youcannot equal. You proclaim that you cannot survive without us, yet propose todictate the terms of our survival. You proclaim that you need us, yet indulgethe impertinence of asserting your right to rule us by force—and expect thatwe, who are not afraid of that physical nature which fills you with terror,will cower at the sight of any lout who has talked you into voting him achance to command us.

"You propose to establish a social order based on the following tenets:that you're incompetent to run your own life, but competent to run the livesof others—that you're unfit to exist in freedom, but fit to become anomnipotent ruler—that you're unable to earn your living by the use of yourown intelligence, but able to judge politicians and to vote them into jobs oftotal power over arts you have never seen, over sciences you have neverstudied, over achievements of which you have no knowledge, over the giganticindustries where you, by your own definition of your capacity, would beunable successfully to fill the job of assistant greaser.

"This idol of your cult of zero-worship, this symbol of impotence—

the congenital dependent—is your image of man and your standard of value,in whose likeness you strive to refashion your soul. 'It's only human,' youcry in defense of any depravity, reaching the stage of self-abasement whereyou seek to make the concept 'human' mean the weakling, the fool, the rotter,the liar, the failure, the coward, the fraud, and to exile from the humanrace the hero, the thinker, the producer, the inventor, the strong, thepurposeful, the pure—as if 'to feel' were human, but to think were not, as ifto fail were human, but to succeed were not, as if corruption were human, but

virtue were not —as if the premise of death were proper to man, but thepremise of life were not.

"In order to deprive us of honor, that you may then deprive us of ourwealth, you have always regarded us as slaves who deserve no moralrecognition. You praise any venture that claims to be nonprofit, and damn themen who made the profits that make the venture possible. You regard as 'inthe public interest' any project serving those who do not pay; it is not inthe public interest to provide any services for those who do the paying.'Public benefit' is anything given as alms; to engage in trade is to injurethe public. 'Public welfare'

is the welfare of those who do not earn it; those who do, are entitled tono welfare. 'The public,' to you, is whoever has failed to achieve any virtueor value; whoever achieves it, whoever provides the goods you require forsurvival, ceases to be regarded as part of the public or as part of the humanrace.

"What blank-out permitted you to hope that you could get away with thismuck of contradictions and to plan it as an ideal society, when the 'No' ofyour victims was sufficient to demolish the whole of your structure? Whatpermits any insolent beggar to wave his sores in the face of his betters andto plead for help in the tone of a threat? You cry, as he does, that you arecounting on our pity, but your secret hope is the moral code that has taughtyou to count on our guilt. You expect us to feel guilty of our virtues in thepresence of your vices, wounds and failures—guilty of succeeding atexistence, guilty of enjoying the life that you damn, yet beg us to help youto live, "Did you want to know who is John Gait? I am the first man ofability who refused to regard it as guilt. I am the first man who would notdo penance for my virtues or let them be used as the tools of my destruction.I am the first man who would not suffer martyrdom at the hands of those whowished me to perish for the privilege of keeping them, alive. I am the firstman who told them that I did not need them, and until they learned to dealwith me as traders, giving value for value, they would have to exist withoutme, as I would exist without them; then I would let them learn whose is theneed and whose the ability—and if human survival is the standard, whose termswould set the way to survive.

"I have done by plan and intention what had been done throughout historyby silent default. There have always been men of intelligence who went onstrike, in protest and despair, but they did not know the meaning of theiraction. The man who retires from public life, to think, but not to share histhoughts—the man who chooses to spend his years in the obscurity of menialemployment, keeping to himself the fire of his mind, never giving it form,expression or reality, refusing to bring it into a world he despises—the manwho is defeated by revulsion, the man who renounces before he has started,the man who gives up rather than give in, the man who functions at a fractionof his capacity, disarmed by his longing for an ideal he has not found—theyare on strike, on strike against unreason, on strike against your world andyour values. But not knowing any values of their own, they abandon the questto know—in the darkness of their hopeless indignation, which is righteouswithout knowledge of the right, and passionate without knowledge of desire,they concede to you the power of reality and surrender the incentives oftheir mind—and they perish in bitter futility, as rebels who never learnedthe object of their rebellion, as lovers who never discovered their love.

"The infamous times you call the Dark Ages were an era of intelligence onstrike, when men of ability went underground and lived undiscovered, studyingin secret, and died, destroying the works of their mind, when only a few ofthe bravest of martyrs remained to keep the human race alive. Every periodruled by mystics was an era of stagnation and want, when most men were onstrike against existence, working for less than their barest survival,

leaving nothing but scraps for their rulers to loot, refusing to think, toventure, to produce, when the ultimate collector of their profits and thefinal authority on truth or error was the whim of some gilded degeneratesanctioned as superior to reason by divine right and by grace of a club.

The road of human history was a string of blank-outs over sterilestretches eroded by faith and force, with only a few brief bursts ofsunlight, when the released energy of the men of the mind performed thewonders you gaped at, admired and promptly extinguished again.

"But there will be no extinction, this time. The game of the mystics isup. You will perish in and by your own unreality. We, the men of reason, willsurvive.

"I have called out on strike the kind of martyrs who had never desertedyou before. I have given them the weapon they had lacked: the knowledge oftheir own moral value. I have taught them that the world is ours, whenever wechoose to claim it, by virtue and grace of the fact that ours is the Moralityof Life. They, the great victims who had produced all the wonders ofhumanity's brief summer, they, the industrialists, the conquerors of matter,had not discovered the nature of their right. They had known that theirs wasthe power. I taught them that theirs was the glory.

"You, who dare to regard us as the moral inferiors of any mystic whoclaims supernatural visions—you, who scramble like vultures for plunderedpennies, yet honor a fortune-teller above a fortune maker—you, who scorn abusinessman as ignoble, but esteem any posturing artist as exalted—the rootof your standards is that mystic miasma which comes from primordial swamps,that cult of death, which pronounces a businessman immoral by reason of thefact that he keeps you alive. You, who claim that you long to rise above thecrude concerns of the body, above the drudgery of serving mere physicalneeds—who is enslaved by physical needs: the Hindu who labors from sunrise tosunset at the shafts of a hand-plow for a bowl of rice, or the American whois driving a tractor? Who is the conqueror of physical reality: the man whosleeps on a bed of nails or the man who sleeps on an inner-spring mattress?Which is the monument to the triumph of the human spirit over matter: thegerm-eaten hovels on the shorelines of the Ganges or the Atlantic skyline ofNew York?

"Unless you learn the answers to these questions—and learn to stand atreverent attention when you face the achievements of man's mind—

you will not stay much longer on this earth, which we love and will notpermit you to damn. You will not sneak by with the rest of your lifespan. Ihave foreshortened the usual course of history and have let you discover thenature of the payment you had hoped to switch to the shoulders of others. Itis the last of your own living power that will now be drained to provide theunearned for the worshippers and carriers of Death. Do not pretend that amalevolent reality defeated you—you were defeated by your own evasions. Donot pretend that you will perish for a noble ideal—you will perish as fodderfor the haters of man.

"But to those of you who still retain a remnant of the dignity and will tolove one's life, I am offering the chance to make a choice.

Choose whether you wish to perish for a morality you have never believedor practiced. Pause on the brink of self-destruction and examine your valuesand your life. You had known how to take an inventory of your wealth. Nowtake an inventory of your mind.

"Since childhood, you have been hiding the guilty secret that you feel nodesire to be moral, no desire to seek self-immolation, that you dread andhate your code, but dare not say it even to yourself, that you're devoid ofthose moral 'instincts' which others profess to feel.

The less you felt, the louder you proclaimed your selfless love andservitude to others, in dread of ever letting them discover your own self,

the self that you betrayed, the self that you kept in concealment, like askeleton in the closet of your body. And they, who were at once your dupesand your deceivers, they listened and voiced their loud approval, in dread ofever letting you discover that they were harboring the same unspoken secret.Existence among you is a giant pretense, an act you all perform for oneanother, each feeling that he is the only guilty freak, each placing hismoral authority in the unknowable known only to others, each faking thereality he feels they expect him to fake, none having the courage to breakthe vicious circle.

"No matter what dishonorable compromise you've made with yourimpracticable creed, no matter what miserable balance, half-cynicism, half-superstition, you now manage to maintain, you still preserve the root, thelethal tenet: the belief that the moral and the practical are opposites.Since childhood, you have been running from the terror of a choice you havenever dared fully to identify: If the practical, whatever you must practiceto exist, whatever works, succeeds, achieves your purpose, whatever bringsyou food and joy, whatever profits you, is evil—and if the good, the moral,is the impractical, whatever fails, destroys, frustrates, whatever injuresyou and brings you loss or pain-then your choice is to be moral or to live.

"The sole result of that murderous doctrine was to remove morality fromlife. You grew up to believe that moral laws bear no relation to the job ofliving, except as an impediment and threat, that man's existence is an amoraljungle where anything goes and anything works.

And in that fog of switching definitions which descends upon a frozenmind, you have forgotten that the evils damned by your creed were the virtuesrequired for living, and you have come to believe that actual evils are thepractical means of existence. Forgetting that the impractical 'good' wasself-sacrifice, you believe that self-esteem is impractical; forgetting thatthe practical 'evil' was production, you believe that robbery is practical.

"Swinging like a helpless branch in the wind of an uncharted moralwilderness; you dare not fully to be evil or fully to live. When you arehonest, you feel the resentment of a sucker; when you cheat, you feel terrorand shame. When you are happy, your joy is diluted by guilt; when you suffer,your pain is augmented by the feeling that pain is your natural state. Youpity the men you admire, you believe they are doomed to fail; you envy themen you hate, you believe they are the masters of existence. You feeldisarmed when you come up against a scoundrel: you believe that evil is boundto win, since the moral is the impotent, the impractical.

"Morality, to you, is a phantom scarecrow made of duty, of boredom, ofpunishment, of pain, a cross-breed between the first schoolteacher of yourpast and the tax collector of your present, a scarecrow standing in a barrenfield, waving a stick to chase away your pleasures —and pleasure, to you, isa liquor-soggy brain, a mindless slut, the stupor of a moron who stakes hiscash on some animal's race, since pleasure cannot be moral.

"If you identify your actual belief, you will find a triple damnation —ofyourself, of life, of virtue—in the grotesque conclusion you have reached:you believe that morality is a necessary evil.

"Do you wonder why you live without dignity, love without fire and diewithout resistance? Do you wonder why, wherever you look, you see nothing butunanswerable questions, why your life is torn by impossible conflicts, whyyou spend it straddling irrational fences to evade artificial choices, suchas soul or body, mind or heart, security or freedom, private profit or publicgood?

"Do you cry that you find no answers? By what means did you hope to findthem? You reject your tool of perception—your mind—then complain that theuniverse is a mystery. You discard your key, then wail that all doors are

locked against you. You start out in pursuit of the irrational, then damnexistence for making no sense.

"The fence you have been straddling for two hours—while hearing my wordsand seeking to escape them—is the coward's formula contained in the sentence:'But we don't have to go to extremes!' The extreme you have always struggledto avoid is the recognition that reality is final, that A is A and that thetruth is true. A moral code impossible to practice, a code that demandsimperfection or death, has taught you to dissolve all ideas in fog, to permitno firm definitions, to regard any concept as approximate and any rule ofconduct as elastic, to hedge on any principle, to compromise on any value, totake the middle of any road.

By extorting your acceptance of supernatural absolutes, it has forced youto reject the absolute of nature. By making moral judgments impossible, ithas made you incapable of rational judgment. A code that forbids you to castthe first stone, has forbidden you to admit the identity of stones and toknow when or if you're being stoned.

"The man who refuses to judge, who neither agrees nor disagrees, whodeclares that there are no absolutes and believes that he escapesresponsibility, is the man responsible for all the blood that is now spilledin the world. Reality is an absolute, existence is an absolute, a speck ofdust is an absolute and so is a human life. Whether you live or die is anabsolute. Whether you have a piece of bread or not, is an absolute.

Whether you eat your bread or see it vanish into a looter's stomach, is anabsolute.

"There are two sides to every issue: one side is right and the other iswrong, but the middle is always evil. The man who is wrong still retains somerespect for truth, if only by accepting the responsibility of choice.

But the man in the middle is the knave who blanks out the truth in orderto pretend that no choice or values exist, who is willing to sit out thecourse of any battle, willing to cash in on the blood of the innocent or tocrawl on his belly to the guilty, who dispenses justice by condemning boththe robber and the robbed to jail, who solves conflicts by ordering thethinker and the fool to meet each other halfway. In any compromise betweenfood and poison, it is only death that can win. In any compromise betweengood and evil, it is only evil that can profit. In that transfusion of bloodwhich drains the good to feed the evil, the compromiser is the transmittingrubber tube.

"You, who are half-rational, half-coward, have been playing a con gamewith reality, but the victim you have conned is yourself. When men reducetheir virtues to the approximate, then evil acquires the force of anabsolute, when loyalty to an unyielding purpose is dropped by the virtuous,it's picked up by scoundrels—and you get the indecent spectacle of acringing, bargaining, traitorous good and a self-righteously uncompromisingevil. As you surrendered to the mystics of muscle when they told you thatignorance consists of claiming knowledge, so now you surrender to them whenthey shriek that immorality consists of pronouncing moral judgment. When theyyell that it is selfish to be certain that you are right, you hasten toassure them that you're certain of nothing.

When they shout that it's immoral to stand on your convictions, you assurethem that you have no convictions whatever. When the thugs of Europe'sPeople's States snarl that you are guilty of intolerance, because you don'ttreat your desire to live and their desire to kill you as a difference ofopinion—you cringe and hasten to assure them that you are not intolerant ofany horror. When some barefoot bum in some pesthole of Asia yells at you: Howdare you be rich—you apologize and beg him to be patient and promise himyou'll give it all away.

"You have reached the blind alley of the treason you committed when youagreed that you had no right to exist. Once, you believed it was 'only acompromise': you conceded it was evil to live for yourself, but moral to livefor the sake of your children. Then you conceded that it was selfish to livefor your children, but moral to live for your community. Then you concededthat it was selfish to live for your community, but moral to live for yourcountry. Now, you are letting this greatest of countries be devoured by anyscum from any corner of the earth, while you concede that it is selfish tolive for your country and that your moral duty is to live for the globe. Aman who has no right to life, has no right to values and will not keep them.

"At the end of your road of successive betrayals, stripped of weapons, ofcertainty, of honor, you commit your final act of treason and sign yourpetition of intellectual bankruptcy: while the muscle-mystics of the People'sStates proclaim that they're the champions of reason and science, you agreeand hasten to proclaim that faith is your cardinal principle, that reason ison the side of your destroyers, but yours is the side of faith. To thestruggling remnants of rational honesty in the twisted, bewildered minds ofyour children, you declare that you can offer no rational argument to supportthe ideas that created this country, that there is no rational justificationfor freedom, for property, for justice, for rights, that they rest on amystical insight and can be accepted only on faith, that in reason and logicthe enemy is right, but faith is superior to reason. You declare to yourchildren that it is rational to loot, to torture, to enslave, to expropriate,to murder, but that they must resist the temptations of logic and stick tothe discipline of remaining irrational—

that skyscrapers, factories, radios, airplanes were the products of faithand mystic intuition, while famines, concentration camps and firing squadsare the products of a reasonable manner of existence—that the industrialrevolution was the revolt of the men of faith against that era of reason andlogic which is known as the Middle Ages. Simultaneously, in the same breath,to the same child, you declare that the looters who rule the People's Stateswill surpass this country in material production, since they are therepresentatives of science, but that it's evil to be concerned with physicalwealth and that one must renounce material prosperity—

you declare that the looters' ideals are noble, but they do not mean them,while you do; that your purpose in fighting the looters is only to accomplishtheir aims, which they cannot accomplish, but you can; and that the way tofight them is to beat them to it and give one's wealth away.

Then you wonder why your children join the People's thugs or become half-crazed delinquents, you wonder why the looters' conquests keep creepingcloser to your doors—and you blame it on human stupidity, declaring that themasses are impervious to reason.

"You blank out the open, public spectacle of the looters' fight againstthe mind, and the fact that their bloodiest horrors are unleashed to punishthe crime of thinking. You blank out the fact that most mystics of musclestarted out as mystics of spirit, that they keep switching from one to theother, that the men you call materialists and spiritualists are only twohalves of the same dissected human, forever seeking completion, but seekingit by swinging from the destruction of the flesh to the destruction of thesoul and vice versa—that they keep running from your colleges to the slavepens of Europe to an open collapse into the mystic muck of India, seeking anyrefuge against reality, any form of escape from the mind.

"You blank it out and cling to your hypocrisy of 'faith' in order to blankout the knowledge that the looters have a stranglehold upon you, whichconsists of your moral code—that the looters are the final and consistentpractitioners of the morality you're half-obeying, half-evading—

that they practice it the only way it can be practiced: by turning theearth into a sacrificial furnace—that your morality forbids you to opposethem in the only way they can be opposed: by refusing to become a sacrificialanimal and proudly asserting your right to exist—that in order to fight themto the finish and with full rectitude, it is your morality that you have toreject, "You blank it out, because your self-esteem is tied to that mystic'unselfishness' which you've never possessed or practiced, but spent so manyyears pretending to possess that the thought of denouncing it fills you withterror. No value is higher than self-esteem, but you've invested it incounterfeit securities—and now your morality has caught you in a trap whereyou are forced to protect your self-esteem by fighting for the creed of self-destruction. The grim joke is on you: that need of self-esteem, which you'reunable to explain or to define, belongs to my morality, not yours; it's theobjective token of my code, it is my proof within your own soul.

"By a feeling he has not learned to identify, but has derived from hisfirst awareness of existence, from his discovery that he has to make choices,man knows that his desperate need of self-esteem is a matter of life ordeath. As a being of volitional consciousness, he knows that he must know hisown value in order to maintain his own life. He knows that he has to beright; to be wrong in action means danger to his life; to be wrong in person,to be evil, means to be unfit for existence.

"Every act of man's life has to be willed; the mere act of obtaining oreating his food implies that the person he preserves is worthy of beingpreserved; every pleasure he seeks to enjoy implies that the person who seeksit is worthy of finding enjoyment. He has no choice about his need of self-esteem, his only choice is the standard by which to gauge it. And he makeshis fatal error when he switches this gauge protecting his life into theservice of his own destruction, when he chooses a standard contradictingexistence and sets his self-esteem against reality.

"Every form of causeless self-doubt, every feeling of inferiority andsecret unworthiness is, in fact, man's hidden dread of his inability to dealwith existence. But the greater his terror, the more fiercely he clings tothe murderous doctrines that choke him. No man can survive the moment ofpronouncing himself irredeemably evil; should he do it, his next moment isinsanity or suicide. To escape it—if he's chosen an irrational standard—hewill fake, evade, blank out; he will cheat himself of reality, of existence,of happiness, of mind; and he will ultimately cheat himself of self-esteem bystruggling to preserve its illusion rather than to risk discovering its lack.To fear to face an issue is to believe that the worst is true.

"It is not any crime you have ever committed that infects your soul withpermanent guilt, it is none of your failures, errors or flaws, but the blank-out by which you attempt to evade them—it is not any sort of Original Sin orunknown prenatal deficiency, but the knowledge and fact of your basicdefault, of suspending your mind, of refusing to think.

Fear and guilt are your chronic emotions, they are real and you do deservethem, but they don't come from the superficial reasons you invent to disguisetheir cause, not from your 'selfishness,' weakness or ignorance, but from areal and basic threat to your existence: fear, because you have abandonedyour weapon of survival, guilt, because you know you have done itvolitionally.

"The self you have betrayed is your mind; self-esteem is reliance on one'spower to think. The ego you seek, that essential 'you' which you cannotexpress or define, is not your emotions or inarticulate dreams, but yourintellect, that judge of your supreme tribunal whom you've impeached in orderto drift at the mercy of any stray shyster you describe as your 'feeling.'Then you drag yourself through a self-made night, in a desperate quest for anameless fire, moved by some fading vision of a dawn you had seen and lost.

"Observe the persistence, in mankind's mythologies, of the legend about aparadise that men had once possessed, the city of Atlantis or the Garden ofEden or some kingdom of perfection, always behind us.

The root of that legend exists, not in the past of the race, but in thepast of every man. You still retain a sense—not as firm as a memory, butdiffused like the pain of hopeless longing—that somewhere in the startingyears of your childhood, before you had learned to submit, to absorb theterror of unreason and to doubt the value of your mind, you had known aradiant state of existence, you had known the independence of a rationalconsciousness facing an open universe. That is the paradise which you havelost, which you seek—which is yours for the taking.

"Some of you will never know who is John Gait. But those of you who haveknown a single moment of love for existence and of pride in being its worthylover, a moment of looking at this earth and letting your glance be itssanction, have known the state of being a man, and I —I am only the man whoknew that that state is not to be betrayed. I am the man who knew what madeit possible and who chose consistently to practice and to be what you hadpracticed and been in that one moment.

"That choice is yours to make. That choice—the dedication to one's highestpotential—is made by accepting the fact that the noblest act you have everperformed is the act of your mind in the process of grasping that two and twomake four.

"Whoever you are—you who are alone with my words in this moment, withnothing but your honesty to help you understand—the choice is still open tobe a human being, but the price is to start from scratch, to stand naked inthe face of reality and, reversing a costly historical error, to declare: Iam, therefore I'll think.1

"Accept the irrevocable fact that your life depends upon your mind.

Admit that the whole of your struggle, your doubts, your fakes, yourevasions, was a desperate quest for escape from the responsibility of avolitional consciousness—a quest for automatic knowledge, for instinctiveaction, for intuitive certainty—and while you called it a longing for thestate of an angel, what you were seeking was the state of an animal.

Accept, as your moral ideal, the task of becoming a man.

"Do not say that you're afraid to trust your mind because you know solittle. Are you safer in surrendering to mystics and discarding the littlethat you know? Live and act within the limit of your knowledge and keepexpanding it to the limit of your life. Redeem your mind from the hockshopsof authority. Accept the fact that you are not omniscient, but playing azombie will not give you omniscience—that your mind is fallible, but becomingmindless will not make you infallible—that an error made on your own is saferthan ten truths accepted on faith, because the first leaves you the means tocorrect it, but the second destroys your capacity to distinguish truth fromerror. In place of your dream of an omniscient automaton, accept the factthat any knowledge man acquires is acquired by his own will and effort, andthat that is his distinction in the universe, that is his nature, hismorality, his glory.

"Discard that unlimited license to evil which consists of claiming thatman is imperfect. By what standard do you damn him when you claim it? Acceptthe fact that in the realm of morality nothing less than perfection will do.But perfection is not to be gauged by mystic commandments to practice theimpossible, and your moral stature is not to be gauged by matters not open toyour choice. Man has a single basic choice: to think or not, and that is thegauge of his virtue. Moral perfection is an unbreached rationality—not thedegree of your intelligence, but the full and relentless use of your mind,not the extent of your knowledge, but the acceptance of reason as anabsolute.

"Learn to distinguish the difference between errors of knowledge andbreaches of morality. An error of knowledge is not a moral flaw, provided youare willing to correct it; only a mystic would judge human beings by thestandard of an impossible, automatic omniscience. But a breach of morality isthe conscious choice of an action you know to be evil, or a willful evasionof knowledge, a suspension of sight and of thought. That which you do notknow, is not a moral charge against you; but that which you refuse to know,is an account of infamy growing in your soul. Make every allowance for errorsof "knowledge; do not forgive or accept any breach of morality. Give thebenefit of the doubt to those who seek to know; but treat as potentialkillers those specimens of insolent depravity who make demands upon you,announcing that they have and seek no reasons, proclaiming, as a license,that they 'just feel if —or those who reject an irrefutable argument bysaying: 'It's only logic' which means: 'It's only reality.' The only realmopposed to reality is the realm and premise of death.

"Accept the fact that the achievement of your happiness is the only moralpurpose of your life, and that happiness—not pain or mindless self-indulgence—is the proof of your moral integrity, since it is the proof andthe result of your loyalty to the achievement of your values.

Happiness was the responsibility you dreaded, it required the kind ofrational discipline you did not value yourself enough to assume—and theanxious staleness of your days is the monument to your evasion of theknowledge that there is no moral substitute for happiness, that there is nomore despicable coward than, the man who deserted the battle for his joy,fearing to assert his right to existence, lacking the courage and the loyaltyto life of a bird or a flower reaching for the sun. Discard the protectiverags of that vice which you called a virtue: humility—learn to valueyourself, which means: to fight for your happiness—and when you learn thatpride is the sum of all virtues, you will learn to live like a man.

"As a basic step of self-esteem, learn to treat as the mark of a cannibalany man's demand for your help. To demand it is to claim that your life ishis property—and loathsome as such claim might be, there's something stillmore loathsome: your agreement. Do you ask if it's ever proper to helpanother man? No—if he claims it as his right or as a moral duty that you owehim. Yes—if such is your own desire based on your own selfish pleasure in thevalue of his person and his struggle. Suffering as such is not a value; onlyman's fight against suffering, is. If you choose to help a man who suffers,do it only on the ground of his virtues, of his fight to recover, of hisrational record, or of the fact that he suffers unjustly; then your action isstill a trade, and his virtue is the payment for your help. But to help a manwho has no virtues, to help him on the ground of his suffering as such, toaccept his faults, his need, as a claim —is to accept the mortgage of a zeroon your values. A man who has no virtues is a hater of existence who acts onthe premise of death; to help him is to sanction his evil and to support hiscareer of destruction. Be it only a penny you will not miss or a kindly smilehe has not earned, a tribute to a zero is treason to life and to all thosewho struggle to maintain it. It is of such pennies and smiles that thedesolation of your world was made.

"Do not say that my morality is too hard for you to practice and that youfear it as you fear the unknown. Whatever living moments you have known, werelived by the values of my code. But you stifled, negated, betrayed it. Youkept sacrificing your virtues to your vices, and the best among men to theworst. Look around you-: what you have done to society, you had done it firstwithin your soul; one is the image of the other. This dismal wreckage, whichis now your world, is the physical form of the treason you committed to yourvalues, to your friends, to your defenders, to your future, to your country,to yourself.

"We—whom you are now calling, but who will not answer any longer—we hadlived among you, but you failed to know us, you refused to think and to seewhat we were. You failed to recognize the motor I invented—and it became, inyour world, a pile of dead scrap. You failed to recognize the hero in yoursoul—and you failed to know me when I passed you in the street. When youcried in despair for the unattainable spirit which you felt had deserted yourworld, you gave it my name, but what you were calling was your own betrayedself-esteem. You will not recover one without the other.

"When you failed to give recognition to man's mind and attempted to rulehuman beings by force—those who submitted had no mind to surrender; those whohad, were men who don't submit. Thus the man of productive genius assumed inyour world the disguise of a playboy and became a destroyer of wealth,choosing to annihilate his fortune rather than surrender it to guns. Thus thethinker, the man of reason, assumed in your world the role of a pirate, todefend his values by force against your force, rather than submit to the ruleof brutality. Do you hear me, Francisco d'Anconia and Ragnar Danneskjold, myfirst friends, my fellow fighters, my fellow outcasts, in whose name andhonor I speak?

"It was the three of us who started what I am now completing. It was thethree of us who resolved to avenge this country and to release its imprisonedsoul. This greatest of countries was built on my morality—on the inviolatesupremacy of man's right to exist—but you dreaded to admit it and live up toit. You stared at an achievement unequaled in history, you looted its effectsand blanked out its cause. In the presence of that monument to humanmorality, which is a factory, a highway or a bridge—you kept damning thiscountry as immoral and its progress as 'material greed,' you kept offeringapologies for this country's greatness to the idol of primordial starvation,to decaying Europe's idol of a leprous, mystic bum.

"This country—the product of reason—could not survive on the morality ofsacrifice. It was not built by men who sought self-immolation or by men whosought handouts. It could not stand on the mystic split that divorced man'ssoul from his body. It could not live by the mystic doctrine that damned thisearth as evil and those who succeeded on earth as depraved. From its start,this country was a threat to the ancient rule of mystics. In the brilliantrocket-explosion of its youth, this country displayed to an incredulous worldwhat greatness was possible to man, what happiness was possible on earth. Itwas one or the other: America or mystics. The mystics knew it; you didn't.You let them infect you with the worship of need—and this country became agiant in body with a mooching midget in place of its soul, while its livingsoul was driven underground to labor and feed you in silence, unnamed,unhonored, negated, its soul and hero: the industrialist. Do you hear me now,Hank Rearden, the greatest of the victims I have avenged?

"Neither he nor the rest of us will return until the road is clear torebuild this country—until the wreckage of the morality of sacrifice has beenwiped out of our way. A country's political system is based on its code ofmorality. We will rebuild America's system on the moral premise which hadbeen its foundation, but which you treated as a guilty underground, in yourfrantic evasion of the conflict between that premise and your mysticmorality: the premise that man is an end in himself, not the means to theends of others, that man's life, his freedom, his happiness are his byinalienable right.

"You who've lost the concept of a right, you who swing in impotentevasiveness between the claim that rights are a gift of God, a supernaturalgift to be taken on faith, or the claim that rights are a gift of society, tobe broken at its arbitrary whim—the source of man's rights is not divine lawor congressional law, but the law of identity. A is A—and Man is Man. Rightsare conditions of existence required by man's nature for his proper survival.

If man is to live on earth, it is right for him to use his mind, it is rightto act on his own free judgment, it is right to work for his values and tokeep the product of his work. If life on earth is his purpose, he has a rightto live as a rational being: nature forbids him the irrational. Any group,any gang, any nation that attempts to negate man's rights, is wrong, whichmeans: is evil, which means: is anti-life.

"Rights are a moral concept—and morality is a matter of choice.

Men are free not to choose man's survival as the standard of their moralsand their laws, but not free to escape from the fact that the alternative isa cannibal society, which exists for a while by devouring its best andcollapses like a cancerous body, when the healthy have been eaten by thediseased, when the rational have been consumed by the irrational. Such hasbeen the fate of your societies in history, but you've evaded the knowledgeof the cause. I am here to state it: the agent of retribution was the law ofidentity, which you cannot escape. Just as man cannot live by means of theirrational, so two men cannot, or two thousand, or two billion. Just as mancan't succeed by defying reality, so a nation can't, or a country, or aglobe. A is A. The rest is a matter of time, provided by the generosity ofvictims.

"Just as man can't exist without his body, so no rights can exist withoutthe right to translate one's rights into reality—to think, to work and tokeep the results—which means: the right of property. The modern mystics ofmuscle who offer you the fraudulent alternative of 'human rights' versus'property rights,' as if one could exist without the other, are making alast, grotesque attempt to revive the doctrine of soul versus body. Only aghost can exist without material property; only a slave can work with noright to the product of his effort. The doctrine that 'human rights' aresuperior to 'property rights' simply means that some human beings have theright to make property out of others; since the competent have nothing togain from the incompetent, it means the right of the incompetent to own theirbetters and to use them as productive cattle. Whoever regards this as humanand right, has no right to the title of 'human.'

"The source of property rights is the law of causality. All property andall forms of wealth are produced by man's mind and labor. As you cannot haveeffects without causes, so you cannot have wealth without its source: withoutintelligence. You cannot force intelligence to work: those who're able tothink, will not work under compulsion; those who will, won't produce muchmore than the price of the whip needed to keep them enslaved. You cannotobtain the products of a mind except on the owner's terms, by trade and byvolitional consent. Any other policy of men toward man's property is thepolicy of criminals, no matter what their numbers. Criminals are savages whoplay it short range and starve when their prey runs out—just as you'restarving today, you who believed that crime could be 'practical' if yourgovernment decreed that robbery was legal and resistance to robbery illegal.

"The only proper purpose of a government is to protect man's rights, whichmeans: to protect him from physical violence. A proper government is only apoliceman, acting as an agent of man's self-defense, and, as such, may resortto force only against those who start the use of force. The only properfunctions of a government are: the police, to protect you from criminals; thearmy, to protect you from foreign invaders; and the courts, to protect yourproperty and contracts from breach or fraud by others, to settle disputes byrational rules, according to objective law. But a government that initiatesthe employment of force against men who had forced no one, the employment ofarmed compulsion against disarmed victims, is a nightmare infernal machinedesigned to annihilate morality: such a government reverses its only moralpurpose and switches from the role of protector to the role of man'sdeadliest enemy, from the role of policeman to the role of a criminal vested

with the right to the wielding of violence against victims deprived of theright of self-defense. Such a government substitutes for morality thefollowing rule of social conduct: you may do whatever you please to yourneighbor, provided your gang is bigger than his.

"Only a brute, a fool or an evader can agree to exist on such terms oragree to give his fellow men a blank check on his life and his mind, toaccept the belief that others have the right to dispose of his person attheir whim, that the will of the majority is omnipotent, that the physicalforce of muscles and numbers is a substitute for justice, reality and truth.We, the men of the mind, we who are traders not masters or slaves, do notdeal in blank checks or grant them. We do not live or work with any form ofthe non-objective.

"So long as men, in the era of savagery, had no concept of objectivereality and believed that physical nature was ruled by the whim of unknowabledemons—no thought, no science, no production were possible. Only when mendiscovered that nature was a firm, predictable absolute were they able torely on their knowledge, to choose their course, to plan their future and,slowly, to rise from the cave. Now you have placed modern industry, with itsimmense complexity of scientific precision, back into the power of unknowabledemons—the unpredictable power of the arbitrary whims of hidden, ugly littlebureaucrats. A farmer will not invest the effort of one summer if he's unableto calculate his chances of a harvest. But you expect industrial giants—whoplan in terms of decades, invest in terms of generations and undertakeninety-nine-year contracts—to continue to function and produce, not knowingwhat random caprice in the skull of what random official will descend uponthem at what moment to demolish the whole of their effort. Drifters andphysical laborers live and plan by the range of a day. The better the mind,the longer the range. A man whose vision extends to a shanty, might continueto build on your quicksands, to grab a fast profit and run. A man whoenvisions skyscrapers, will not. Nor will he give ten years of unswervingdevotion to the task of inventing a new product, when he knows that gangs ofentrenched mediocrity are juggling the laws against him, to tie him,,restrict him and force him to fail, but should he fight them and struggle andsucceed, they will seize his rewards and his invention.

"Look past the range of the moment, you who cry that you fear to competewith men of superior intelligence, that their mind is a threat to yourlivelihood, that the strong leave no chance to the weak in a market ofvoluntary trade. What determines the material value of your work? Nothing butthe productive effort of your mind—if you lived on a desert island. The lessefficient the thinking of your brain, the less your physical labor wouldbring you—and you could spend your life on a single routine, collecting aprecarious harvest or hunting with bow and arrows, unable to think anyfurther. But when you live in a rational society, where men are free totrade, you receive an incalculable bonus: the material value of your work isdetermined not only by your effort, but by the effort of the best productiveminds who exist in the world around you.

"When you work in a modern factory, you are paid, not only for your labor,but for all the productive genius which has made that factory possible: forthe work of the industrialist who built it, for the work of the investor whosaved the money to risk on the untried and the new, for the work of theengineer who designed the machines of which you are pushing the levers, forthe work of the inventor who created the product which you spend your time onmaking, for the work of the scientist who discovered the laws that went intothe making of that product, for the work of the philosopher who taught menhow to think and whom you spend your time denouncing.

"The machine, the frozen form of a living intelligence, is the power thatexpands the potential of your life by raising the productivity of your time.

If you worked as a blacksmith in the mystics' Middle Ages, the whole of yourearning capacity would consist of an iron bar produced by your hands in daysand days of effort. How many tons of rail do you produce per day if you workfor Hank Rearden? Would you dare to claim that the size of your pay check wascreated solely by your physical labor and that those rails were the productof your muscles? The standard of living of that blacksmith is all that yourmuscles are worth; the rest is a gift from Hank Rearden.

"Every man is free to rise as far as he's able or willing, but it's onlythe degree to which he thinks that determines the degree to which he'll rise.Physical labor as such can extend no further than the range of the moment.The man who does no more than physical labor, consumes the material value-equivalent of his own contribution to the process of production, and leavesno further value, neither for himself nor others. But the man who produces anidea in any field of rational endeavor—the man who discovers new knowledge—isthe permanent benefactor of humanity. Material products can't be shared, theybelong to some ultimate consumer; it is only the value of an idea that can beshared with unlimited numbers of men, making all sharers richer at no one'ssacrifice or loss, raising the productive capacity of whatever labor theyperform. It is the value of his own time that the strong of the intellecttransfers to the weak, letting them work on the jobs he discovered, whiledevoting his time to further discoveries. This is mutual trade to mutualadvantage; the interests of the mind are one, no matter what the degree ofintelligence, among men who desire to work and don't seek or expect theunearned.

"In proportion to the mental energy he spent, the man who creates a newinvention receives but a small percentage of his value in terms of materialpayment, no matter what fortune he makes, no matter what millions he earns.But the man who works as a janitor in the factory producing that invention,receives an enormous payment in proportion to the mental effort that his jobrequires of him. And the same is true of all men between, on all levels ofambition and ability.

The man at the top of the intellectual pyramid contributes the most to allthose below him, but gets nothing except his material payment, receiving nointellectual bonus from others to add to the value of his time. The man atthe bottom who, left to himself, would starve in his hopeless ineptitude,contributes nothing to those above him, but receives the bonus of all oftheir brains. Such is the nature of the 'competition' between the strong andthe weak of the intellect. Such is the pattern of 'exploitation' for whichyou have damned the strong.

"Such was the service we had given you and were glad and willing to give.What did we ask in return? Nothing but freedom. We required that you leave usfree to function—free to think and to work as we choose—free to take our ownrisks and to bear our own losses-free to earn our own profits and to make our own fortunes—free to gambleon your rationality, to submit our products to your judgment for the purposeof a voluntary trade, to rely on the objective value of our work and on yourmind's ability to see it—free to count on your intelligence and honesty, andto deal with nothing but your mind.

Such was the price we asked, which you chose to reject as too high.

You decided to call it unfair that we, who had dragged you out of yourhovels and provided you with modern apartments, with radios, movies and cars,should own our palaces and yachts—you decided that you had a right to yourwages, but we had no right to our profits, that you did not want us to dealwith your mind, but to deal, instead, with your gun. Our answer to that, was:'May you be damned!1 Our answer came true. You are.

"You did not care to compete in terms of intelligence—you are nowcompeting in terms of brutality. You did not care to allow rewards to be won

by successful production—you are now running a race in which rewards are wonby successful plunder. You called it selfish and cruel that men should tradevalue for value—you have now established an unselfish society where theytrade extortion for extortion. Your system is a legal civil war, where mengang up on one another and struggle for possession of the law, which they useas a club over rivals, till another gang wrests it from their clutch andclubs them with it in their turn, all of them clamoring protestations ofservice to an unnamed public's unspecified good. You had said that you saw nodifference between economic and political power, between the power of moneyand the power of guns—no difference between reward and punishment, nodifference between purchase and plunder, no difference between pleasure andfear, no difference between life and death. You are learning the differencenow, "Some of you might plead the excuse of your ignorance, of a limited mindand a limited range. But the damned and the guiltiest among you are the menwho had the capacity to know, yet chose to blank out reality, the men whowere willing to sell their intelligence into cynical servitude to force: thecontemptible breed of those mystics of science who profess a devotion to somesort of 'pure knowledge'—

the purity consisting of their claim that such knowledge has no practicalpurpose on this earth—who reserve their logic for inanimate matter, butbelieve that the subject of dealing with men requires and deserves norationality, who scorn money and sell their souls in exchange for alaboratory supplied by loot. And since there is no such thing as 'non-practical knowledge' or any sort of 'disinterested' action, since they scornthe use of their science for the purpose and profit of life, they delivertheir science to the service of death, to the only practical purpose it canever have for looters: to inventing weapons of coercion and destruction.They, the intellects who seek escape from moral values, they are the damnedon this earth, theirs is the guilt beyond forgiveness. Do you hear me, Dr.Robert Stadler?

"But it is not to him that I wish to speak. I am speaking to those amongyou who have retained some sovereign shred of their soul, unsold andunstamped: '—to the order of others.' If, in the chaos of the motives thathave made you listen to the radio tonight, there was an honest, rationaldesire to learn what is wrong with the world, you are the man whom I wishedto address. By the rules and terms of my code, one owes a rational statementto those whom it does concern and who're making an effort to know. Thosewho're making an effort to fail to understand me, are not a concern of mine.

"I am speaking to those who desire to live and to recapture the honor oftheir soul. Now that you know the truth about your world, stop supportingyour own destroyers. The evil of the world is made possible by nothing butthe sanction you give it. Withdraw your sanction. Withdraw your support. Donot try to live on your enemies'

terms or to win at a game where they're setting the rules. Do not seek thefavor of those who enslaved you, do not beg for alms from those who haverobbed you, be it subsidies, loans or jobs, do not join their team to recoupwhat they've taken by helping them rob your neighbors.

One cannot hope to maintain one's life by accepting bribes to condoneone's destruction. Do not struggle for profit, success or security at theprice of a lien on your right to exist. Such a lien is not to be paid off;the more you pay them, the more they will demand; the greater the values youseek or achieve, the more vulnerably helpless you become. Theirs is a systemof white blackmail devised to bleed you, not by means of your sins, but bymeans of your love for existence.

"Do not attempt to rise on the looters' terms or to climb a ladder whilethey're holding the ropes. Do not allow their hands to touch the only powerthat keeps them in power: your living ambition. Go on strike—in the manner I

did. Use your mind and skill in private, extend your knowledge, develop yourability, but do not share your achievements with others. Do not try toproduce a fortune, with a looter riding on your back. Stay on the lowest rungof their ladder, earn no more than your barest survival, do not make an extrapenny to support the looters' state. Since you're captive, act as a captive,do not help them pretend that you're free. Be the silent, incorruptible enemythey dread. When they force you, obey—but do not volunteer. Never volunteer astep in their direction, or a wish, or a plea, or a purpose.

Do not help a holdup man to claim that he acts as your friend andbenefactor. Do not help your jailers to pretend that their jail is yournatural state of existence. Do not help them to fake reality. That fake isthe only dam holding off their secret terror, the terror of knowing they'reunfit to exist; remove it and let them drown; your sanction is their onlylife belt.

"If you find a chance to vanish into some wilderness out of their reach,do so, but not to exist as a bandit or to create a gang competing with theirracket; build a productive life of your own with those who accept your moralcode and are willing to struggle for a human existence. You have no chance towin on the Morality of Death or by the code of faith and force; raise astandard to which the honest will repair: the standard of Life and Reason.

"Act as a rational being and aim at becoming a rallying point for allthose who are starved for a voice of integrity—act on your rational values,whether alone in the midst of your enemies, or with a few of your chosenfriends, or as the founder of a modest community on the frontier of mankind'srebirth.

"When the looters' state collapses, deprived of the best of its slaves,when it falls to a level of impotent chaos, like the mystic-ridden nations ofthe Orient, and dissolves into starving robber gangs fighting to rob oneanother—when the advocates of the morality of sacrifice perish with theirfinal ideal—then and on that day we will return.

"We will open the gates of our city to those who deserve to enter, a cityof smokestacks, pipe lines, orchards, markets and inviolate homes.

We will act as the rallying center for such hidden outposts as you'llbuild. With the sign of the dollar as our symbol—the sign of free trade andfree minds—we will move to reclaim this country once more from the impotentsavages who never discovered its nature, its meaning, its splendor. Those whochoose to join us, will join us; those who don't, will not have the power tostop us; hordes of savages have never been an obstacle to men who carried thebanner of the mind.

"Then this country will once more become a sanctuary for a vanishingspecies: the rational being. The political system we will build is containedin a single moral premise: no man may obtain any values from others byresorting to physical force. Every man will stand or fall, live or die by hisrational judgment. If he fails to use it and falls, he will be his onlyvictim. If he fears that his judgment is inadequate, he will not be given agun to improve it, If he chooses to correct his errors in time, he will havethe unobstructed example of his betters, for guidance in learning to think;but an end will be put to the infamy of paying with one life for the errorsof another.

"In that world, you'll be able to rise in the morning with the spirit youhad known in your childhood: that spirit of eagerness, adventure andcertainty which comes from dealing with a rational universe. No child isafraid of nature; it is your fear of men that will vanish, the fear that hasstunted your soul, the fear you acquired in your early encounters with theincomprehensible, the unpredictable, the contradictory, the arbitrary, thehidden, the faked, the irrational in men. You will live in a world ofresponsible beings, who will be as consistent and reliable as facts; the

guarantee of their character will be a system of existence where objectivereality is the standard and the judge. Your virtues will be given protection,your vices and weaknesses will not. Every chance will be open to your good,none will be provided for your evil. What you'll receive from men will not bealms, or pity, or mercy, or forgiveness of sins, but a single value: justice.And when you'll look at men or at yourself, you will feel, not disgust,suspicion and guilt, but a single constant: respect.

"Such is the future you are capable of winning. It requires a struggle; sodoes any human value. All life is a purposeful struggle, and your only choiceis the choice of a goal. Do you wish to continue the battle of your presentor do you wish to fight for my world? Do you wish to continue a struggle thatconsists of clinging to precarious ledges in a sliding descent to the abyss,a struggle where the hardships you endure are irreversible and the victoriesyou win bring you closer to destruction? Or do you wish to undertake astruggle that consists of rising from ledge to ledge in a steady ascent tothe top, a struggle where the hardships are investments in your future, andthe victories bring you irreversibly closer to the world of your moral ideal,and should you die without reaching full sunlight, you will die on a leveltouched by its rays? Such is the choice before you. Let your mind and yourlove of existence decide.

"The last of my words will be addressed to those heroes who might still behidden in the world, those who are held prisoner, not by their evasions, butby their virtues and their desperate courage. My brothers in spirit, check onyour virtues and on the nature of the enemies you're serving. Your destroyershold you by means of your endurance, your generosity, your innocence, yourlove—the endurance that carries their burdens—the generosity that responds totheir cries of despair—the innocence that is unable to conceive of their eviland gives them the benefit of every doubt, refusing to condemn them withoutunderstanding and incapable of understanding such motives as theirs—the love,your love of life, which makes you believe that they are men and that theylove it, too. But the world of today is the world they wanted; life is theobject of their hatred. Leave them to the death they worship. In the name ofyour magnificent devotion to this earth, leave them, don't exhaust thegreatness of your soul on achieving the triumph of the evil of theirs. Do youhear me . . . my love?

"In the name of the best within you, do not sacrifice this world to thosewho are its worst. In the name of the values that keep you alive, do not letyour vision of man be distorted by the ugly, the cowardly, the mindless inthose who have never achieved his title. Do not lose your knowledge thatman's proper estate is an upright posture, an intransigent mind and a stepthat travels unlimited roads. Do not let your fire go out, spark byirreplaceable spark, in the hopeless swamps of the approximate, the not-quite, the not-yet, the not-at-all.

Do not let the hero in your soul perish, in lonely frustration for thelife you deserved, but have never been able to reach. Check your road and thenature of your battle. The world you desired can be won, it exists, it isreal, it is possible, it's yours.

"But to win it requires your total dedication and a total break with theworld of your past, with the doctrine that man is a sacrificial animal whoexists for the pleasure of others. Fight for the value of your person. Fightfor the virtue of your pride. Fight for the essence of that which is man: forhis sovereign rational mind. Fight with the radiant certainty and theabsolute rectitude of knowing that yours is the Morality of Life and thatyours is the battle for any achievement, any value, any grandeur, anygoodness, any joy that has ever existed on this earth.

"You will win when you are ready to pronounce the oath I have taken at thestart of my battle—and for those who wish to know the day of my return, I

shall now repeat it to the hearing of the world: "I swear—by my life andlove of it—that I will never live for the sake of another man, nor askanother man to live for mine."

CHAPTER VIIITHE EGOIST

"It wasn't real, was it?" said Mr. Thompson.

They stood in front of the radio, as the last sound of Gait's voice hadleft them. No one had moved through the span of silence; they had stood,looking at the radio, as if waiting. But the radio was now only a wooden boxwith some knobs and a circle of cloth stretched over an empty loud-speaker.

"We seem to have heard it," said Tinky Holloway.

"We couldn't help it," said Chick Morrison.

Mr. Thompson was sitting on a crate. The pale, oblong smear at the levelof his elbow was the face of Wesley Mouch, who was seated on the floor. Farbehind them, like an island in the vast semi-darkness of the studio space,the drawing room prepared for their broadcast stood deserted and fullylighted, a semicircle of empty armchairs under a cobweb of dead microphonesin the glare of the floodlights which no one had taken the initiative to turnoff.

Mr. Thompson's eyes were darting over the faces around him, as if insearch of some special vibrations known only to him. The rest of them weretrying to do it surreptitiously, each attempting to catch a glimpse of theothers without letting them catch his own glance.

"Let me out of here!" screamed a young third-rate assistant, suddenly andto no one in particular.

"Stay put!" snapped Mr. Thompson.

The sound of his own order and the hiccough-moan of the figure immobilizedsomewhere in the darkness, seemed to help him recapture a familiar version ofreality. His head emerged an inch higher from his shoulders.

"Who permitted it to hap—" he began in a rising voice, but stopped; thevibrations he caught were the dangerous panic of the cornered.

"What do you make of it?" he asked, instead. There was no answer.

"Well?" He waited. "Well, say something, somebody!"

"We don't have to believe it, do we?" cried James Taggart, thrusting hisface toward Mr. Thompson, in a manner that was almost a threat.

"Do we?" Taggart's face was distorted; his features seemed shapeless; amustache of small beads sparkled between his nose and mouth.

"Pipe down," said Mr. Thompson uncertainly, drawing a little away fromhim.

"We don't have to believe it!" Taggart's voice had the flat, insistentsound of an effort to maintain a trance. "Nobody's ever said it before!It's just one man! We don't have to believe it!""Take it easy," said Mr. Thompson.

"Why is he so sure he's right? Who is he to go against the whole world,against everything ever said for centuries and centuries? Who is he to know?Nobody can be sure! Nobody can know what's right!

There isn't any right!"

"Shut up!" yelled Mr. Thompson. "What are you trying to—"The blast that stopped him was a military march leaping suddenly forthfrom the radio receiver—the military march interrupted three hours ago,played by the familiar screeches of a studio record. It took them a fewstunned seconds to grasp it, while the cheerful, thumping chords went goose-stepping through the silence, sounding grotesquely irrelevant, like the mirthof a half-wit. The station's program director was blindly obeying theabsolute that no radio time was ever to be left blank.

"Tell them to cut it off!" screamed Wesley Mouch, leaping to his feet. "Itwill make the public think that we authorized that speech!"

"You damn fool!" cried Mr. Thompson. "Would you rather have the publicthink that we didn't?"

Mouch stopped short and his eyes shot to Mr. Thompson with theappreciative glance of an amateur at a master.

"Broadcasts as usual!" ordered Mr. Thompson. "Tell them to go on withwhatever programs they'd scheduled for this hour! No special announcements,no explanations! Tell them to go on as if nothing had happened!"

Half a dozen of Chick Morrison's morale conditioners went scurrying offtoward telephones.

"Muzzle the commentators! Don't allow them to comment! Send word to everystation in the country! Let the public wonder! Don't let them think thatwe're worried! Don't let them think that it's important!"

"No!" screamed Eugene Lawson. "No, no, no! We can't give people theimpression that we're endorsing that speech! It's horrible, horrible,horrible!" Lawson was not in tears, but his voice had the undignified soundof an adult sobbing with helpless rage.

"Who's said anything about endorsing it?" snapped Mr. Thompson.

"It's horrible! It's immoral! It's selfish, heartless, ruthless! It's themost vicious speech ever made! It ... it will make people demand to behappy!"

"It's only a speech," said Mr. Thompson, not too firmly.

"It seems to me," said Chick Morrison, his voice tentatively helpful,'"that people of nobler spiritual nature, you know what I mean, people of . .. of . . . well, of mystical insight"—he paused, as if waiting to be slapped,but no one moved, so he repeated firmly—"yes, of mystical insight, won't gofor that speech. Logic isn't everything, after all."

"The workingmen won't go for it," said Tinky Holloway, a bit morehelpfully. "He didn't sound like a friend of labor."

"The women of the country won't go for it," declared Ma Chalmers.

"It is, I believe, an established fact that women don't go for that stuffabout the mind. Women have finer feelings. You can count on the women."

"You can count on the scientists," said Dr. Simon Pritchett. They were allpressing forward, suddenly eager to speak, as if they had found a subjectthey could handle with assurance. "Scientists know better than to believe inreason. He's no friend of the scientists."

"He's no friend of anybody," said Wesley Mouch, recapturing a shade ofconfidence at the sudden realization, "except maybe of big business."

"No!" cried Mr. Mowen in terror. "No! Don't accuse us! Don't say it! Iwon't have you say it!"

"What?"

"That . . . that . . . that anybody is a friend of business!""Don't let's make a fuss about that speech," said Dr. Floyd Ferris."It was too intellectual. Much too intellectual for the common man. Itwill have no effect. People are too dumb to understand it.""Yeah," said Mouch hopefully, "that's so."

"In the first place," said Dr. Ferris, encouraged, "people can't think. Inthe second place, they don't want to."

"In the third place," said Fred Kinnan, "they don't want to starve.And what do you propose to do about that?"

It was as if he had pronounced the question which all of the precedingutterances had been intended to stave off. No one answered him, but headsdrew faintly deeper into shoulders, and figures drew faintly closer to oneanother, like a small cluster under the weight of the studio's empty space.The military march boomed through the silence with the inflexible gaiety of agrinning skull.

"Turn it off!" yelled Mr. Thompson, waving at the radio. "Turn that damnthing off!"

Someone obeyed him. But the sudden silence was worse.

"Well?" said Mr. Thompson at last, raising his eyes reluctantly to FredKinnan. "What do you think we ought to do?"

"Who, me?" chuckled Kinnan. "I don't run this show."

Mr. Thompson slammed his fist down on his knee. "Say something —" heordered, but seeing Kinnan turn away, added, "somebody!"

There were no volunteers. "What are we to do?" he yelled, knowing that theman who answered would, thereafter, be the man in power.

"What are we to do? Can't somebody tell us what to do?"

"I can!"

t It was a woman's voice, but it had the quality of the voice they hadheard on the radio. They whirled to Dagny before she had time to step forwardfrom the darkness beyond the group. As she stepped forward, her facefrightened them—because it was devoid of fear.

"I can," she said, addressing Mr. Thompson. "You're to give up."

"Give up?" he repeated blankly.

"You're through. Don't you see that you're through? What else do you need,after what you've heard? Give up and get out of the way.

Leave men free to exist." He was looking at her, neither objecting normoving. "You're still alive, you're using a human language, you're asking foranswers, you're counting on reason—you're still counting on reason, God damnyou! You're able to understand. It isn't possible that you haven'tunderstood. There's nothing you can now pretend to hope, to want or gain orgrab or reach. There's nothing but destruction ahead, the world's and yourown. Give up and get out."

They were listening intently, but as if they did not hear her words, as ifthey were clinging blindly to a quality she was alone among them to possess:the quality of being alive. There was a sound of exultant laughter under theangry violence of her voice, her face was lifted, her eyes seemed to begreeting some spectacle at an incalculable distance, so that the glowingpatch on her forehead did not look like the reflection of a studio spotlight,but of a sunrise.

"You wish to live, don't you? Get out of the way, if you want a chance.Let those who can, take over. He knows what to do. You don't. He is able tocreate the means of human survival. You aren't."

"Don't listen to her!"

It was so savage a cry of hatred that they drew away from Dr.

Robert Stadler, as if he had given voice to the unconfessed within them.His face looked as they feared theirs would look in the privacy of darkness.

"Don't listen to her!" he cried, his eyes avoiding hers, while hers pausedon him for a brief, level glance that began as a shock of astonishment andended as an obituary. "It's your life or his!"

"Keep quiet, Professor," said Mr. Thompson, brushing him off with the jerkof one hand. Mr. Thompson's eyes were watching Dagny, as if some thought werestruggling to take shape inside his skull.

"You know the truth, all of you," she said, "and so do I, and so doesevery man who's heard John Gait! What else are you waiting for?

For proof? He's given it to you. For facts? They're all around you. Howmany corpses do you intend to pile up before you renounce it—your guns, yourpower, your controls and the whole of your miserable altruistic creed? Giveit up, if you want to live. Give it up, if there's anything left in your mindthat's still able to want human beings to remain alive on this earth!"

"But it's treason!" cried Eugene Lawson. "She's talking pure treason!"

"Now, now," said Mr. Thompson. "You don't have to go to extremes."

"Huh?" asked Tinky Holloway.

"But . . . but surely it's outrageous?" asked Chick Morrison."You're not agreeing with her, are you?" asked Wesley Mouch.

"Who's said anything about agreeing?" said Mr. Thompson, his tonesurprisingly placid. "Don't be premature. Just don't you be premature, any ofyou. There's no harm in listening to any argument, is there?"

"That kind of argument?" asked Wesley Mouch, his finger stabbing again andagain in Dagny's direction.

"Any kind," said Mr. Thompson placidly. "We mustn't be intolerant,"

"But it's treason, ruin, disloyalty, selfishness and big-businesspropaganda!"

"Oh, I don't know," said Mr. Thompson. "We've got to keep an open mind.We've got to give consideration to every one's viewpoint.

She might have something there. He knows what to do. We've got to beflexible."

"Do you mean that you're willing to quit?" gasped Mouch.

"Now don't jump to conclusions," snapped Mr. Thompson angrily.

"If there's one thing I can't stand, it's people who jump to conclusions.And another thing is ivory-tower intellectuals who stick to some pet theoryand haven't any sense of practical reality. At a time like this, we've got tobe flexible above all."

He saw a look of bewilderment on all the faces around him, on Dagny's andon the others, though not for the same reasons. He smiled, rose to his feetand turned to Dagny.

"Thank you, Miss Taggart," he said. "Thank you for speaking your mind.That's what I want you to know—that you can trust me and speak to me withfull frankness. We're not your enemies, Miss Taggart.

Don't pay any attention to the boys—they're upset, but they'll come downto earth. We're not your enemies, nor the country's. Sure, we've mademistakes, we're only human, but we're trying to do our best for the people-that is, I mean, for everybody—in these difficult times.

We can't make snap judgments and reach momentous decisions on the spur ofthe moment, can we? We've got to consider it, and mull it over, and weigh itcarefully. I just want you to remember that we're not anybody's enemies—yourealize that, don't you?"

"I've said everything I had to say," she answered, turning away from him,with no clue to the meaning of his words and no strength to attempt to findit.

She turned to Eddie Willers, who had watched the men around them with alook of so great an indignation that he seemed paralyzed —as if his brainwere crying, "It's evil!" and could not move to any further thought. Shejerked her head, indicating the door; he followed her obediently.

Dr. Robert Stadler waited until the door had closed after them, thenwhirled on Mr. Thompson. "You bloody fool! Do you know what you're playingwith? Don't you understand that it's life or death? That it's you or him?"

The thin tremor that ran along Mr. Thompson's lips was a smile ofcontempt. "It's a funny way for a professor to behave. I didn't thinkprofessors ever went to pieces."

"Don't you understand? Don't you see that it's one or the other?"

"And what is it that you want me to do?"

"You must kill him."

It was the fact that Dr. Stadler had not cried it, but had said it in aflat, cold, suddenly and fully conscious voice, that brought a chill momentof silence as the whole room's answer.

"You must find him," said Dr. Stadler, his voice cracking and rising oncemore. "You must leave no stone unturned till you find him and destroy him! Ifhe lives, he'll destroy all of us! If he lives, we can't!"

"How am I to find him?" asked Mr. Thompson, speaking slowly and carefully.

"I ... I can tell you. I can give you a lead. Watch that Taggart woman.Set your men to watch every move she makes. She'll lead you to him, sooner orlater."

"How do you know that?"

"Isn't it obvious? Isn't it sheer chance that she hasn't deserted you longago? Don't you have the wits to see that she's one of his kind?"He did not state what kind.

"Yeah," said Mr. Thompson thoughtfully, "yeah, that's true." He jerked hishead up with a smile of satisfaction. "The professor's got something there.Put a tail on Miss Taggart," he ordered, snapping his fingers at Mouch. "Haveher tailed day and night. We've got to find him."

"Yes, sir, " said Mouch blankly.

"And when you find him," Dr. Stadler asked tensely, "you'll kill him?"

"Kill him, you damn fool? We need him!" cried Mr. Thompson.

Mouch waited, but no one ventured the question that was on everyone'smind, so he made the effort to utter stiffly, "I don't understand you, Mr.Thompson."

"Oh, you theoretical intellectuals!" said Mr. Thompson with exasperation."What are you all gaping at? It's simple. Whoever he is, he's a man ofaction. Besides, he's got a pressure group: he's cornered all the men ofbrains. He knows what to do. We'll find him and he'll tell us. He'll tell uswhat to do. He'll make things work. He'll pull us out of the hole."

"Us, Mr. Thompson?"

"Sure. Never mind your theories. We'll make a deal with him.""With him?"

"Sure. Oh, we'll have to compromise, we'll have to make a few concessionsto big business, and the welfare boys won't like it, but what the hell!—doyou know any other way out?"

"But his ideas-"

"Who cares about ideas?"

"Mr. Thompson," said Mouch, choking, "I . . .I'm afraid he's a man who'snot open to a deal."

"There's no such thing," said Mr. Thompson.

A cold wind rattled the broken signs over the windows of abandoned shops,in the street outside the radio station. The city seemed abnormally quiet.The distant rumble of the traffic sounded lower than usual and made the windsound louder. Empty sidewalks stretched off into the darkness; a few lonefigures stood in whispering clusters under the rare lights.

Eddie Willers did not speak until they were many blocks away from thestation. He stopped abruptly, when they reached a deserted square where thepublic loud-speakers, which no one had thought of turning off, were nowbroadcasting a domestic comedy—the shrill voices of a husband and wifequarreling over Junior's dates—to an empty stretch of pavement enclosed byunlighted house fronts. Beyond the square, a few dots of light, scatteredVertically above the twenty fifth-floor limit of the city, suggested adistant, rising form, which was the Taggart Building.

Eddie' stopped and pointed at the building, his finger shaking.

"Dagny!" he cried, then lowered his voice involuntarily. "Dagny," hewhispered, "I know him. He ... he works there . . . there . . ."

He kept pointing at the building with incredulous helplessness. "He worksfor Taggart Transcontinental . . ."

"I know," she answered; her voice was a lifeless monotone.

"As a track laborer ... as the lowest of track laborers . . ."

"I know."

"I've talked to him . . . I've been talking to him for years . . .

in the Terminal cafeteria. ... He used to ask questions . . . all sortsof questions about the railroad, and I—God, Dagny! was I protecting therailroad or was I helping to destroy it?"

"Both. Neither. It doesn't matter now."

"I could have staked my life that he loved the railroad!""He does."

"But he's destroyed it.""Yes."

She tightened the collar of her coat and walked on, against a gust ofwind.

"I used to talk to him," he said, after a while. "His face . . . Dagny, itdidn't look like any of the others, it ... it showed that he understood somuch. ... I was glad, whenever I saw him there, in the cafeteria ... Ijust talked ... I don't think I knew that he was asking questions . . . buthe was ... so many questions about the railroad and . . . and about you."

"Did he ever ask you what I look like, when I'm asleep?"

"Yes . . . Yes, he did . . . I'd found you once, asleep in the office, andwhen I mentioned it, he—" He stopped, as a sudden connection crashed intoplace in his mind.

She turned to him, in the ray of a street lamp, raising and holding herface in full light for a silent, deliberate moment, as if in answer andconfirmation of his thought.

He closed his eyes. "Oh God, Dagny!" he whispered.

They walked on in silence.

"He's gone by now, isn't he?" he asked. "From the Taggart Terminal, Imean."

"Eddie," she said, her voice suddenly grim, "if you value his life, don'tever ask that question. You don't want them to find him, do you?

Don't give them any leads. Don't ever breathe a word to anyone abouthaving known him. Don't try to find out whether he's still working in theTerminal."

"You don't mean that he's still there?"

"I don't know. I know only that he might be."

"Now?"

"Yes."

"Still?"

"Yes. Keep quiet about it, if you don't want to destroy him."

"I think he's gone. He won't be back. I haven't seen him since . . .

since . . ."

"Since when?" she asked sharply.

"The end of May. The night when you left for Utah, remember?" He paused,as the memory of that night's encounter and the full understanding of itsmeaning struck him together. He said with effort, "1 saw him that night. Notsince . . . I've waited for him, in the cafeteria ... He never came back."

"I don't think he'll let you see him now, he'll keep out of your way.

Bat don't look for him. Don't inquire."

"It's funny. I don't even know what name he used. It was Johnny somethingor-"

"It was John Gait," she said, with a faint, mirthless chuckle. "Don't lookat the Terminal payroll. The name is still there.""Just like that? All these years?""For twelve years. Just like that.""And it's still there now?""Yes."

After a moment, he said, "It proves nothing, I know. The personnel officehasn't taken a single name off the payroll list since Directive 10-289. If a

man quits, they give his name and job to a starving friend of their own,rather than report it to the Unification Board."

"Don't question the personnel office or anyone. Don't call attention tohis name. If you or I make any inquiries about him, somebody might begin towonder. Don't look for him. Don't make any move in his direction. And if youever catch sight of him by chance, act as if you didn't know him."

He nodded. After a while, he said, his voice tense and low, "I wouldn'tturn him over to them, not even to save the railroad."

"Eddie-"

"Yes?"

"If you ever catch sight of him, tell me."He nodded.

Two blocks later, he asked quietly, "You're going to quit, one of thesedays, and vanish, aren't you?"

"Why do you say that?" It was almost a cry."Aren't you?"

She did not answer at once; when she did, the sound of despair was presentin her voice only in the form of too tight a monotone: "Eddie, if I quit,what would happen to the Taggart trains?"

"There would be no Taggart trains within a week. Maybe less."

"There will be no looters' government within ten days. Then men like CuffyMeigs will devour the last of our rails and engines. Should I lose the battleby failing to wait one more moment? How can I let it go—TaggartTranscontinental, Eddie—go forever, when one last effort can still keep it inexistence? If I've stood things this long, I can stand them a little longer.Just a little longer. I'm not helping the looters.

Nothing can help them now."

"What are they going to do?"

"I don't kn ow. What can they do? They're finished.""I suppose so."

"Didn't you see them? They're miserable, panic-stricken rats, running fortheir lives."

"Does it mean anything to them?""What?"

"Their lives."

"They're still struggling, aren't they? But they're through and they knowit. "

"Have they ever acted on what they know?"

"They'll have to. They'll give up. It won't be long. And we'll be here tosave whatever's left."

"Mr. Thompson wishes it to be known," said official broadcasts on themorning of November 23, "that there is no cause for alarm. He urges thepublic not to draw any hasty conclusions. We must preserve our discipline,our morale, our unity and our sense of broad-minded tolerance. Theunconventional speech, which some of you might have heard on the radio lastnight, was a thought-provoking contribution to our pool of ideas on worldproblems. We must consider it soberly, avoiding the extremes of totalcondemnation or of reckless agreement.

We must regard it as one viewpoint out of many in our democratic forum ofpublic opinion, which, as last night has proved, is open to all. The truth,says Mr. Thompson, has many facets. We must remain impartial."

"They're silent," wrote Chick Morrison, as a summary of its content,across the report from one of the field agents he had sent out on a missionentitled Public Pulse Taking. "They're silent," he wrote across the nextreport, then across another and another. "Silence," he wrote, with a frown ofuneasiness, summing up his report to Mr. Thompson.

"People seem to be silent."

The flames that went up to the sky of a winter night and devoured a homein Wyoming were not seen by the people of Kansas, who watched a trembling redglow on the prairie horizon, made by the flames that went up to devour afarm, and the glow was not reflected by the windows of a street inPennsylvania, where the twisting red tongues were reflections of the flamesthat went up to devour a factory. Nobody mentioned, next morning, that thoseflames had not been set off. by chance and that the owners of the threeplaces had vanished. Neighbors observed it without comment—and withoutastonishment. A few homes were found abandoned in random corners across thenation, some left locked, shuttered and empty, others open and gutted of allmovable goods—but people watched it in silence and, through the snowdrifts ofuntended streets in the haze of pre-morning darkness, went on trudging totheir jobs, a little slower than usual.

Then, on November 27, a speaker at a political meeting in Cleveland wasbeaten up and had to escape by scurrying down dark alleys.

His silent audience had come to sudden life when he had shouted that thecause of all their troubles was their selfish concern with their owntroubles.

On the morning of November 29, the workers of a shoe factory inMassachusetts were astonished, on entering their workshop, to find that theforeman was late. But they went to their usual posts and went on with theirhabitual routine, pulling levers, pressing buttons, feeding leather intoautomatic cutters, piling boxes on a moving belt, wondering, as the hourswent by, why they did not catch sight of the foreman, or the superintendent,or the general manager, or the company president.

It was noon before they discovered that the front offices of the plantwere empty.

"You goddamn cannibals!" screamed a woman in the midst of a crowded movietheater, breaking into sudden, hysterical sobs—and the audience showed nosign of astonishment, as if she were screaming for them all, "There is nocause for alarm," said official broadcasts on December 5. "Mr. Thompsonwishes it to be known that he is willing to negotiate with John Gait for thepurpose of devising ways and means to achieve a speedy solution of ourproblems. Mr. Thompson urges the people to be patient. We must not worry, wemust not doubt, we must not lose heart,"

The attendants of a hospital in Illinois showed no astonishment when a manwas brought in, beaten up by his elder brother, who had supported him all hislife: the younger man had screamed at the elder, accusing him of selfishnessand greed—just as the attendants of a hospital in New York City showed noastonishment at the case of a woman who came in with a fractured jaw: she hadbeen slapped in the face by a total stranger, who had heard her ordering herfive-year old son to give his best toy to the children of neighbors.

Chick Morrison attempted a whistle-stop tour to buttress the country'smorale by speeches on self-sacrifice for the general welfare. He was stonedat the first of his stops and had to return to Washington.

Nobody had ever granted them the title of "the better men" or, grantingit, had paused to grasp that title's meaning, but everybody knew, each in hisown community, neighborhood, office or shop and hi his own unidentifiedterms, who would be the men that would now fail to appear at their posts onsome coming morning and would silently vanish in search of unknown frontiers—the men whose faces were tighter than the faces around them, whose eyes weremore direct, whose energy was more conscientiously enduring—the men who werenow slipping away, one by one, from every corner of the country—

of the country which was now like the descendant of what had once beenregal glory, prostrated by the scourge of hemophilia, losing the best of itsblood from a wound not to be healed.

"But we're willing to negotiate!" yelled Mr. Thompson to his assistants,ordering the special announcement to be repeated by all radio stations threetimes a day. "We're willing to negotiate! He'll hear it! He'll answer!"

Special listeners were ordered to keep watch, day and night, at radioreceivers tuned to every known frequency of sound, waiting for an answer froman unknown transmitter. There was no answer.

Empty, hopeless, unfocused faces were becoming more apparent in thestreets of the cities, but no one could read their meaning. As some men wereescaping with their bodies into the underground of uninhabited regions, soothers could only save their souls and were escaping into the underground oftheir minds—and no power on earth could tell whether their blanklyindifferent eyes were shutters protecting hidden treasures at the bottom ofshafts no longer to be mined, or were merely gaping holes of the parasite'semptiness never to be filled.

"I don't know what to do," said the assistant superintendent of an oilrefinery, refusing to accept the job of the superintendent who had vanished—and the agents of the Unification Board were unable to tell whether he liedor not. It was only an edge of precision in the tone of his voice, an absenceof apology or shame, that made them wonder whether he was a rebel or a fool.It was dangerous to force the job on either.

"Give us men!" The plea began to hammer progressively louder upon the deskof the Unification Board, from all parts of a country ravaged byunemployment, and neither the pleaders nor the Board dared to add thedangerous words which the cry was implying: "Give us men of ability!" Therewere waiting lines years' long for the jobs of janitors, greasers, portersand bus boys; there was no one to apply for the jobs of executives, managers,superintendents, engineers.

The explosions of oil refineries, the crashes of defective airplanes, thebreak-outs of blast furnaces, the wrecks of colliding trains, and the rumorsof drunken orgies in the offices of newly created executives, made themembers of the Board fear the kind of men who did apply for the positions ofresponsibility.

"Don't despair! Don't give up!" said official broadcasts on December 15,and on every day thereafter, "We will reach an agreement with John Gait. Wewill get him to lead us. He will solve all our problems.

He will make things work. Don't give up! We will get John Gait!"

Rewards and honors were offered to applicants for managerial jobs —then toforemen—then to skilled mechanics—then to any man who would make an effort todeserve a promotion in rank: wage raises, bonuses, tax exemptions and a medaldevised by Wesley Mouch, to be known as "The Order of Public Benefactors." Itbrought no results. Ragged people listened to the offers of material comfortsand turned away with lethargic indifference, as if they had lost the conceptof "Value." These, thought the public-pulse-takers with terror, were men whodid not care to live—or men who did not care to live on present terms.

"Don't despair! Don't give up! John Gait will solve our problems!"

said the radio voices of official broadcasts, traveling through thesilence of falling snow into the silence of unheated homes.

"Don't tell them that we haven't got him!" cried Mr. Thompson to hisassistants, "But for God's sake tell them to find him!" Squads of ChickMorrison's boys were assigned to the task of manufacturing rumors: half ofthem went spreading the story that John Gait was in Washington and inconference with government officials—while the other half went spreading thestory that the government would give five hundred thousand dollars as rewardfor information that would help to find John Gait.

"No, not a clue," said Wesley Mouch to Mr. Thompson, summing up thereports of the special agents who had been sent to check on every man by thename of John Gait throughout the country. "They're a shabby lot. There's a

John Gait who's a professor of ornithology, eighty years old —there's aretired greengrocer with a wife and nine children—there's an unskilledrailroad laborer who's held the same job for twelve years—and other such trash."

"Don't despair! We will get John Gait!" said official broadcasts in thedaytime—but at night, every hour on the hour, by a secret, official order, anappeal was sent from short-wave transmitters into the empty reaches of space:"Calling John Gait! . . . Calling John Gait! . . .

Are you listening, John Gait? . . . We wish to negotiate. We wish toconfer with you. Give us word on where you can be reached. . . .

Do you hear us, John Gait?" There was no answer.

The wads of worthless paper money were growing heavier in the pockets ofthe nation, but there was less and less for that money to buy. In September,a bushel of wheat had cost eleven dollars; it had cost thirty dollars inNovember; it had cost one hundred in December; it was now approaching theprice of two hundred—while the printing presses of the government treasurywere running a race with starvation, and losing.

When the workers of a factory beat up their foreman and wrecked themachinery in a fit of despair— no action could be taken against them. Arrestswere futile, the jails were full, the arresting officers winked at theirprisoners and let them escape on then- way to prison-men were going through the motions prescribed for the moment, with nothought of the moment to follow. No action could be taken when mobs ofstarving people attacked warehouses on the outskirts of cities.

No action could be taken when punitive squadrons joined the people theyhad been sent to punish.

"Are you listening, John Gait? ... We wish to negotiate. We might meetyour terms. . . . Are you listening?"

There were whispered rumors of covered wagons traveling by night throughabandoned trails, and of secret settlements armed to resist the attacks ofthose whom they called the "Indians"—the attacks of any looting savages, bethey homeless mobs or government agents. Lights were seen, once in a while,on the distant horizon of a prairie, in the hills, on the ledges ofmountains, where no buildings had been known to exist. But no soldiers couldbe persuaded to investigate the sources of those lights.

On the doors of abandoned houses, on the gates of crumbling factories, onthe walls of government buildings, there appeared, once in a while, traced inchalk, in paint, in blood, the curving mark which was the sign of the dollar.

"Can you hear us, John Gait? . . . Send us word. Name your terms.

We will meet any terms you set. Can you hear us?"

There was no answer.

The shaft of red smoke that shot to the sky on the night of January 22 andstood abnormally still for a while, like a solemn memorial obelisk, thenwavered and swept back and forth across the sky, like a searchlight sendingsome undecipherable message, then went out as abruptly as it had come, markedthe end of Rearden Steel—but the inhabitants of the area did not know it.They learned it only on subsequent nights, when they—who had cursed the millsfor the smoke, the fumes, the soot and the noise—looked out and, instead ofthe glow pulsating with life on their familiar horizon, they saw a blackvoid.

The mills had been nationalized, as the property of a deserter.

The first bearer of the title of "People's Manager," appointed to run themills, had been a man of the Orren Boyle faction, a pudgy hanger-on of themetallurgical industry, who had wanted nothing but to follow his employeeswhile going through the motions of leading. But at the end of a month, aftertoo many clashes with the workers, too many occasions when his only answerhad been that he couldn't help it, too many undelivered orders, too many

telephonic pressures from his buddies, he had begged to be transferred tosome other position. The Orren Boyle faction had been falling apart, sinceMr. Boyle had been confined to a rest home, where his doctor had forbiddenhim any contact with business and had put him to the job of weaving baskets,as a means of occupational therapy. The second "People's Manager" sent toRearden Steel had belonged to the faction of Cuffy Meigs. He had worn leatherleggings and perfumed hair lotions, he had come to work with a gun on hiship, he had kept snapping that discipline was his primary goal and that byGod he'd get it or else. The only discernible rule of the discipline had beenhis order forbidding all questions.

After weeks of frantic activity on the part of insurance companies, offiremen, of ambulances and of first-aid units, attending to a series ofinexplicable accidents—the "People's Manager" had vanished one morning,having sold and shipped to sundry racketeers of Europe and Latin America mostof the cranes, the automatic conveyors, the supplies of refractory brick, theemergency power generator, and the carpet from what had once been Rearden'soffice.

No one had been able to untangle the issues in the violent chaos of thenext few days—the issues had never been named, the sides had remainedunacknowledged, but everyone had known that the bloody encounters between theolder workers and the newer had not been driven to such ferocious intensityby the trivial causes that kept setting them off—neither guards nor policemennor state troopers had been able to keep order for the length of a day—norcould any faction muster a candidate willing to accept the post of "People'sManager."

On January 22, the operations of Rearden Steel had been orderedtemporarily suspended.

The shaft of red smoke, that night, had been caused by a sixty-year oldworker, who had set fire to one of the structures and had been caught in theact, laughing dazedly and staring at the flames. "To avenge Hank Rearden!" hehad cried defiantly, tears running down his furnace-tanned face.

Don't let it hurt you like this—thought Dagny, slumped across her desk,over the page of the newspaper where a single brief paragraph announced the"temporary" end of Rearden Steel—don't let it hurt you so much. . . . Shekept seeing the face of Hank Rearden, as he had stood at the window of hisoffice, watching a crane move against the sky with a load of green-blue rail.. . . Don't let it hurt him like this —was the plea in her mind, addressed tono one—don't let him hear of it, don't let him know. . . . Then she sawanother face, a face with unflinching green eyes, saying to her, in a voicemade implacable by the quality of respect for facts: "You'll have to hearabout it.

. . . You'll hear about every wreck. You'll hear about every discontinuedtrain. . . . Nobody stays in this valley by faking reality in any mannerwhatever. . . ." Then she sat still, with no sight and no sound in her mind,with nothing but that enormous presence which was pain —until she heard thefamiliar cry that had become a drug killing all sensations except thecapacity to act: "Miss Taggart, we don't know what to do!"—and she shot toher feet to answer.

"The People's State of Guatemala," said the newspapers on January 26,"declines the request of the United States for the loan of a thousand tons ofsteel. "

On the night of February 3, a young pilot was flying his usual route, aweekly-flight from Dallas to New York City. When he reached the emptydarkness beyond Philadelphia—in the place where the flames of Rearden Steelhad for years been his favorite landmark, his greeting in the loneliness ofnight, the beacon of a living earth—he saw a snow-covered spread, dead-white

and phosphorescent in the starlight, a spread of peaks and craters thatlooked like the surface of the moon.He quit his job, next morning.

Through the frozen nights, over dying cities, knocking in vain atunanswering windows, beating on unechoing walls, rising above the roofs oflightless buildings and the skeletal girders of ruins, the plea went oncrying through space, crying to the stationary motion of the stars, to theheatless fire of their twinkling: "Can you hear us, John Gait? Can you hearus?"

"Miss Taggart, we don't know what to do," said Mr. Thompson; he hadsummoned her to a personal conference on one of his scurrying trips to NewYork. "We're ready to give in, to meet his terms, to let him take over—butwhere is he?"

"For the third time," she said, her face and voice shut tight against anyfissure of emotion, "I do not know where he is. What made you think I did?""Well, I didn't know, I had to try ... I thought, just in case . . .I thought, maybe if you had a way to reach him—""I haven't."

"You see, we can't announce, not even by short-wave radio, that we'rewilling to surrender altogether. People might hear it. But if you had someway to reach him, to let him know that we're ready to give in, to scrap ourpolicies, to do anything he tells us to—"

"I said I haven't."

"If he'd only agree to a conference, just a conference, it wouldn't commithim to anything, would it? We're willing to turn the whole economy over tohim—if he'd only tell us when, where, how. If he'd give us some word or sign. . . if he'd answer us . . . Why doesn't he answer?"

"You've heard his speech."

"But what are we to do? We can't just quit and leave the country withoutany government at all. I shudder to think what would happen.

With the kind of social elements now on the loose—why, Miss Taggart, it'sall I can do to keep them in line or we'd have plunder and bloody murder inbroad daylight. I don't know what's got into people, but they just don't seemto be civilized any more. We can't quit at a time like this. We can neitherquit nor run things any longer. What are we to do, Miss Taggart?"

"Start decontrolling."

"Huh?"

"Start lifting taxes and removing controls.""Oh, no, no, no! That's out of the question!""Out of whose question?"

"I mean, not at this time, Miss Taggart, not at this time. The countryisn't ready for it. Personally, I'd agree with you, I'm a freedom loving man,Miss Taggart, I'm not after power—but this is an emergency.

People aren't ready for freedom. We've got to keep a strong hand. We can'tadopt an idealistic theory, which—"

"Then don't ask me what to do," she said, and rose to her feet.

"But, Miss Taggart-"

"I didn't come here to argue."

She was at the door when he sighed and said, "I hope he's still alive."She stopped. "I hope they haven't done anything rash."

A moment passed before she was able to ask, "Who?" and to make it a word,not a scream.

He shrugged, spreading his arms and letting them drop helplessly.

"I can't hold my own boys in line any longer. I can't tell what they mightattempt to do. There's one clique—the Ferris-Lawson-Meigs faction—that's beenafter me for over a year to adopt stronger measures. A tougher policy, theymean. Frankly, what they mean is: to resort to terror. Introduce the death

penalty for civilian crimes, for critics, dissenters and the like. Theirargument is that since people won't co-operate, won't act for the publicinterest voluntarily, we've got to force them to. Nothing will make oursystem work, they say, but terror.

And they may be right, from the look of things nowadays. But Wesley won'tgo for strong-arm methods; Wesley is a peaceful man, a liberal, and so am T.We're trying to keep the Ferris boys in check, but . . .

You see, they're set against any surrender to John Gait. They don't wantus to deal with him. They don't want us to find him. I wouldn't put anythingpast them. If they found him first, they'd—there's no telling what they mightdo. . . . That's what worries me. Why doesn't he answer? Why hasn't heanswered us at all? What if they've found him and killed him? I wouldn'tknow. . . . So I hoped that perhaps you had some way . . . some means ofknowing that he's still alive . . ." His voice trailed off Into a questionmark.

The whole of her resistance against a rush of liquefying terror went intothe effort to keep her voice as stiff as her knees, long enough to say, "I donot know," and her knees stiff enough to carry her out of the room.

From behind the rotted posts of what had once been a corner vegetablestand, Dagny glanced furtively back at the street: the rare lamp posts brokethe street into separate islands, she could see a pawnshop in the first patchof light, a saloon in the next, a church in the farthest, and black gapsbetween them; the sidewalks were deserted; it was hard to tell, but thestreet seemed empty.

She turned the corner, with deliberately resonant steps, then stoppedabruptly to listen: it was hard to tell whether the abnormal tightness insideher chest was the sound of her own heartbeats, and hard to distinguish itfrom the sound of distant wheels and from the glassy rustle which was theEast River somewhere close by; but she heard no sound of human steps behindher. She jerked her shoulders, it was part-shrug, part-shudder, and shewalked faster. A rusty clock in some unlighted cavern coughed out the hour offour A.M.

The fear of being followed did not seem fully real, as no fear could bereal to her now. She wondered whether the unnatural lightness of her body wasa state of tension or relaxation; her body seemed drawn so tightly that shefelt as if it were reduced to a single attribute: to the power of motion; hermind seemed inaccessibly relaxed, like a motor set to the automatic controlof an absolute no longer to be questioned.

If a naked bullet could feel in mid-flight, this is what it would feel,she thought; just the motion and the goal, nothing else. She thought itvaguely, distantly, as if her own person were unreal; only the word "naked"seemed to reach her: naked . . . stripped of all concern but for the target .. . for the number "367," the number of a house on the East River, which hermind kept repeating, the number it had so long been forbidden to consider.

Three-sixty-seven—she thought, looking for an invisible shape ahead, amongthe angular forms of tenements—three-sixty-seven . . .

that is where he lives . . . if he lives at all. . . . Her calm, herdetachment and the confidence of her steps came from the certainty that thiswas an "if with which she could not exist any longer.

She had existed with it for ten days—and the nights behind her were asingle progression that had brought her to this night, as if the momentum nowdriving her steps were the sound of her own steps still ringing, unanswered,in the tunnels of the Terminal. She had searched for him through the tunnels,she had walked for hours, night after night—the hours of the shift he hadonce worked—through the underground passages and platforms and shops andevery twist of abandoned tracks, asking no questions of anyone, offering no

explanations of her presence. She had walked, with no sense of fear or hope,moved by a feeling of desperate loyalty that was almost a feeling of pride.

The root of that feeling was the moments when she had stopped in suddenastonishment in some dark subterranean corner and had heard the words half-stated in her mind: This is my railroad—as she looked at a vault vibrating tothe sound of distant wheels; this is my life—as she felt the clot of tension,which was the stopped and the suspended within herself; this is my love—asshe thought of the man who, perhaps, was somewhere in those tunnels. Therecan be no conflict among these three . . . what am I doubting? . . . what cankeep us apart, here, where only he and I belong? . . . Then, recapturing thecontext of the present, she had walked steadily on, with the sense of thesame unbroken loyalty, but the sound of different words: You have forbiddenme to look for you, you may damn me, you may choose to discard me . . . butby the right of the fact that I am alive, I must know that you are ... Imust see you this once . . . not to stop, not to speak, not to touch you,only to see. . . . She had not seen him. She had abandoned her search, whenshe had noticed the curious, wondering glances of the underground workers,following her steps.

She had called a meeting of the Terminal track laborers for the allegedpurpose of boosting their morale, she had held the meeting twice, to face allthe men in turn—she had repeated the same unintelligible speech, feeling astab of shame at the empty generalities she uttered and, together, a stab ofpride that it did not matter to her any longer—she had looked at theexhausted, brutalized faces of men who did not care whether they were orderedto work or to listen to meaningless sounds. She had not seen his face amongthem. "Was everyone present?" she had asked the foreman. "Yeah, I guess so,"he had answered indifferently.

She had loitered at the Terminal entrances, watching the men as they cameto work. But there were too many entrances to cover and no place where shecould watch while remaining unseen—she had stood in the soggy twilight on asidewalk glittering with rain, pressed to the wall of a warehouse, her coatcollar raised to her cheekbones, raindrops falling off the brim of her hat-she had stood exposed to the sight of the street, knowing that the glances ofthe men who passed her were glances of recognition and astonishment, knowingthat her vigil was too dangerously obvious. If there was a John Gait amongthem, someone could guess the nature of her quest ... if there was no JohnGait among them ... if there was no John Gait in the world, she thought,then no danger existed—and no world.

No danger and no world, she thought—as she walked through the streets ofthe slums toward a house with the number "367," which was or was not hishome. She wondered whether this was what one felt while awaiting a verdict ofdeath: no fear, no anger, no concern, nothing but the icy detachment of lightwithout heat or of cognition without values.

A tin can clattered from under her toes, and the sound went beating tooloudly and too long, as if against the walls of an abandoned city.

The streets seemed razed by exhaustion, not by rest, as if the men insidethe walls were not asleep, but had collapsed. He would be home from work atthis hour, she thought . . . if he worked . . . if he still had a home. . . .She looked at the shapes of the slums, at the crumbling plaster, the peelingpaint, the fading signboards of failing shops with unwanted goods in unwashedwindows, the sagging steps unsafe to climb, the clotheslines of garmentsunfit to wear, the undone, the unattended, the given up, the incomplete, allthe twisted monuments of a losing race against two enemies: "no time" and "nostrength"

—and she thought that this was the place where he had lived for twelveyears, he who possessed such extravagant power to lighten the job of humanexistence.

Some memory kept struggling to reach her, then came back: its name wasStarnesville. She felt the sensation of a shudder. But this is New YorkCity!—she cried to herself in defense of the greatness she had loved; thenshe faced with unmoving austerity the verdict pronounced by her mind: a citythat had left him in these slums for twelve years was damned and doomed tothe future of Starnesville.

Then, abruptly, it ceased to matter; she felt a peculiar shock, like theshock of sudden silence, a sense of stillness within her, which she took fora sense of calm: she saw the number "367" above the door of an ancienttenement.

She was calm, she thought, it was only time that had suddenly lost itscontinuity and had broken her perception into separate snatches: she knew themoment when she saw the number—then the moment when she looked at a list on aboard in the moldy half-light of a doorway and saw the words "John Gait, 5th,rear" scrawled in pencil by some illiterate hand—then the moment when shestopped at the foot of a stairway, glanced up at the vanishing angles of therailing and suddenly leaned against the wall, trembling with terror,preferring not to know—then the moment when she felt the movement of her footcoming to rest on the first of the steps—then a single, unbroken progressionof lightness, of rising without effort or doubt or fear, of feeling thetwisting installments of stairway dropping down beneath her unhesitant feet,as if the momentum of her irresistible rise were coming from the straightnessof her body, the poise of her shoulders, the lift of her head and thesolemnly exultant certainty that in the moment of ultimate decision, it wasnot disaster she expected of her life, at the end of a rising stairway shehad needed thirty-seven years to climb.

At the top, she saw a narrow hallway, its walls converging to an unlighteddoor. She heard the floorboards creaking in the silence, under her steps. Shefelt the pressure of her finger on a doorbell and heard the sound of ringingin the unknown space beyond. She waited. She heard the brief crack of aboard, but it came from the floor below. She heard the sliding wail of atugboat somewhere on the river. Then she knew that she had missed some spanof time, because her next awareness was not like a moment of awakening, butlike a moment of birth: as if two sounds were pulling her out of a void, thesound of a step behind the door and the sound of a lock being turned—but shewas not present until the moment when suddenly there was no door before herand the figure standing on the threshold was John Gait, standing casually inhis own doorway, dressed in slacks and shirt, the angle of his waistlineslanting faintly against the light behind him.

She knew that his eyes were grasping this moment, then sweeping over itspast and its future, that a lightning process of calculation was bringing itinto his conscious control—and by the time a fold of his shirt moved with themotion of his breath, he knew the sum—and the sum was a smile of radiantgreeting.

She was now unable to move. He seized her arm, he jerked her inside theroom, she felt the clinging pressure of his mouth, she felt the slendernessof his body through the suddenly alien stiffness of her coat.

She saw the laughter in his eyes, she felt the touch of his mouth againand again, she was sagging in his arms, she was breathing in gasps, as if shehad not breathed for five flights of stairs, her face was pressed to theangle between his neck and shoulder, to hold him, to hold him with her arms,her hands and the skin of her cheek.

"John . . . you're alive . . ." was all she could say.

He nodded, as if he knew what the words were intended to explain.

Then he picked up her hat that had fallen to the floor, he took off hercoat and put it aside, he looked at her slender, trembling figure, a sparkleof approval in his eyes, his hand moving over the tight, high collared, dark

blue sweater that gave to her body the fragility of a schoolgirl and thetension of a fighter.

"The next time I see you," he said, "wear a white one. It will lookwonderful, too,"

She realized that she was dressed as she never appeared in public.

as she had been dressed at home through the sleepless hours of that night.She laughed, rediscovering the ability to laugh: she had expected his firstwords to be anything but that.

"If there is a next time," he added calmly.

"What ... do you mean?"

He went to the door and locked it. "Sit down," he said.

She remained standing, but she took the time to glance at the room she hadnot noticed: a long, bare garret with a bed in one corner and a gas stove inanother, a few pieces of wooden furniture, naked boards stressing the lengthof the floor, a single lamp burning on a desk, a closed door in the shadowsbeyond the lamp's circle—and New York City beyond an enormous window, thespread of angular structures and scattered lights, and the shaft of theTaggart Building far in the distance.

"Now listen carefully," he said. "We have about half an hour, I think. Iknow why you came here. I told you that it would be hard to stand and thatyou would be likely to break. Don't regret it. You see?—I can't regret it,either. But now, we have to know how to act, from here on. In about half anhour, the looters' agents, who followed you, will be here to arrest me."

"Oh no!" she gasped.

"Dagny, whoever among them had any remnant of human perceptiveness wouldknow that you're not one of them, that you're their last link to me, andwould not let you out of his sight—or the sight of his spies."

"I wasn't followed! I watched, I—"

"You wouldn't know how to notice it. Sneaking is one art they're expertat. Whoever followed you is reporting to his bosses right now.

Your presence in this district, at this hour, my name on the boarddownstairs, the fact that I work for your railroad—it's enough even for themto connect, "

"Then let's get out of here!"

He shook his head. "They've surrounded the block by now. Your followerwould have every policeman in the district at his immediate call. Now I wantyou to know what you'll have to do when they come here. Dagny, you have onlyone chance to save me. If you did not quite understand what I said on theradio about the man in the middle, you'll understand it now. There is nomiddle for you to take. And you cannot take my side, not so long as we're intheir hands. Now you must take their side."

"What?"

"You must take their side, as fully, consistently and loudly as yourcapacity for deception will permit. You must act as one of them. You must actas my worst enemy. If you do, I'll have a chance to come out of it alive.They need me too much, they'll go to any extreme before they bring themselvesto kill me. Whatever they extort from people, they can extort it only throughtheir victims' values — and they have no value of mine to hold over my head,nothing to threaten me with. But if they get the slightest suspicion of whatwe are to each other, they will have you on a torture rack — I mean, physicaltorture — before my eyes, in less than a week. I am not going to wait forthat. At the first mention of a threat to you, I will kill myself and stopthem right there."

He said it without emphasis, in the same impersonal tone of practicalcalculation as the rest. She knew that he meant it and that he was right tomean it: she saw in what manner she alone had the power to succeed atdestroying him, where all the power of his enemies would fail. He saw the

look of stillness in her eyes, a look of understanding and of horror. Henodded, with a faint smile.

"I don't have to tell you," he said, "that if I do it, it won't be an actof self-sacrifice. I do not care to live on their terms, I do not care toobey them and I do not care to see you enduring a drawn-out murder.

There will be no values for me to seek after that — and I do not care toexist without values. I don't have to tell you that we owe no morality tothose who hold us under a gun. So use every power of deceit you can command,but convince them that you hate me. Then we'll have a chance to remain aliveand to escape — I don't know when or how, but I'll know that I'm free to act.Is this understood?"

She forced herself to lift her head, to look straight at him and to nod.

"When they come," he said, "tell them that you had been trying to find mefor them, that you became suspicious when you saw my name on your payrolllist and that you came here to investigate."

She nodded.

"I will stall about admitting my identity — they might recognize my voice,but I'll attempt to deny it — so that it will be you who'll tell them that Iam the John Gait they're seeking."

It took her a few seconds longer, but she nodded, "Afterwards, you'llclaim — and accept — that five-hundred-thousand dollar reward they've offeredfor my capture."

She closed her eyes, then nodded.

"Dagny," he said slowly, "there is no way to serve your own values undertheir system. Sooner or later, whether you intended it or not, they had tobring you to the point where the only thing you can do for me is to turnagainst me. Gather your strength and do it — then we'll earn this one half-hour and, perhaps, the future."

I'll do it," she said firmly, and added, "if that is what happens, if "Itwill happen. Don't regret it. I won't. You haven't seen the nature of ourenemies. You'll see it now. If I have to be the pawn in the demonstrationthat will convince you, I'm willing to be—and to win you from them, once andfor all. You didn't want to wait any longer?

Oh, Dagny, Dagny, neither did I!"

It was the way he held her, the way he kissed her mouth that made her feelas if every step she had taken, every danger, every doubt, even her treasonagainst him, if it was treason, all of it were giving her an exultant rightto this moment. He saw the struggle in her face, the tension of anincredulous protest against herself—and she heard the sound of his voicethrough the strands of her hair pressed to his lips: "Don't think of themnow. Never think of pain or danger or enemies a moment longer than isnecessary to fight them. You're here.

It's our time and our life, not theirs. Don't struggle not to be happy.

You are."

"At the risk of destroying you?" she whispered.

"You won't. But—yes, even that. You don't think it's indifference, do you?Was it indifference that broke you and brought you here?"

"I—" And then the violence of the truth made her pull his mouth down tohers, then throw the words at his face: "I didn't care whether either one ofus lived afterwards, just to see you this once!"

"I would have been disappointed if you hadn't come."

"Do you know what it was like, waiting, fighting it, delaying it one moreday, then one more, then—"

He chuckled. "Do I?" he said softly.

Her hand dropped in a helpless gesture: she thought of his ten years."When I heard your voice on the radio," she said, "when I heard the greateststatement I ever . . . No, I have no right to tell you what I thought of it,"

"Why not?"

"You think that I haven't accepted it.""You will."

"Were you speaking from here?"

"No, from the valley."

"And then you returned to New York?"

"The next morning."

"And you've been here ever since?"

"Yes."

"Have you heard the kind of appeals they're sending out to you everynight?"

"Sure."

She glanced slowly about the room, her eyes moving from the towers of thecity in the window to the wooden rafters of his ceiling, to the crackedplaster of his walls, to the iron posts of his bed. "You've been here allthat time," she said. "You've lived here for twelve years . . .

here . . . like this . . ."

"Like this," he said, throwing open the door at the end of the room.

She gasped: the long, light-flooded, windowless space beyond thethreshold, enclosed in a shell of softly lustrous metal, like a smallballroom aboard a submarine, was the most efficiently modern laboratory shehad ever seen.

"Come in," he said, grinning. "I don't have to keep secrets from you anylonger."

It was like crossing the border into a different universe. She looked atthe complex equipment sparkling in a bright, diffused glow, at the mesh ofglittering wires, at the blackboard chalked with mathematical formulas, atthe long counters of objects shaped by the ruthless discipline of a purpose-then at the sagging boards and crumbling plaster of the garret. Either-or,she thought; this was the choice confronting the world: a human soul in theimage of one or of the other.

"You wanted to know where I worked for eleven months out of the year," hesaid, "All this," she asked, pointing at the laboratory, "on the salary of—

she pointed at the garret—"of an unskilled laborer?"

"Oh, no! On the royalties Midas Mulligan pays me for his powerhouse, forthe ray screen, for the radio transmitter and a few other jobs of that kind.""Then . . . then why did you have to work as a track laborer?""Because no money earned in the valley is ever to be spent outside.""Where did you get this equipment?"

"I designed it. Andrew Stockton's foundry made it." He pointed to anunobtrusive object the size of a radio cabinet in a corner of the room:"There's the motor you wanted," and chuckled at her gasp, at the involuntaryjolt that threw her forward, "Don't bother studying it, you won't give itaway to them now."

She was staring at the shining metal cylinders and the glistening coils ofwire that suggested the rusted shape resting, like a sacred relic, in a glasscoffin in a vault of the Taggart Terminal.

"It supplies my own electric power for the laboratory," he said. "No onehas had to wonder why a track laborer is using such exorbitant amounts ofelectricity."

"But if they ever found this place—"

He gave an odd, brief chuckle. "They won't."

"How long have you been—?"

She stopped; this time, she did not gasp; the sight confronting her couldnot be greeted by anything except a moment of total inner stillness: on thewall, behind a row of machinery, she saw a' picture cut out of a newspaper—apicture of her, in slacks and shirt, standing by the side of the engine at

the opening of the John Gait Line, her head lifted, her smile holding thecontext, the meaning and the sunlight of that day.

A moan was her only answer, as she turned to him, but the look on his facematched hers in the picture.

"I was the symbol of what you wanted to destroy in the world, " he said,"But you were my symbol of what I wanted to achieve." He pointed at thepicture. "This is how men expect to feel about their life once or twice, asan exception, in the course of their lifetime. But I—this is what I chose asthe constant and normal."

The look on his face, the serene intensity of his eyes and of his mindmade it real to her, now, in this moment, in this moment's full context, inthis city.

When he kissed her, she knew that their arms, holding each other, wereholding their greatest triumph, that this was the reality untouched by painor fear, the reality of Halley's Fifth Concerto, this was the reward they hadwanted, fought for and won.

The doorbell rang.

Her first reaction was to draw back, his—to hold her closer and longer.When he raised his head, he was smiling. He said only, "Now is the timenot to be afraid."

She followed him back to the garret. She heard the door of the laboratoryclicking locked behind them.

He held her coat for her silently, he waited until she had tied its beltand had put on her hat—then he walked to the entrance door and opened it.

Three of the four men who entered were muscular figures in militaryuniforms, each with two guns on his hips, with broad faces devoid of shapeand eyes untouched by perception. The fourth, their leader, was a frailcivilian with an expensive overcoat, a neat mustache, pale blue eyes and themanner of an intellectual of the public-relations species.

He blinked at Gait, at the room, made a step forward, stopped, madeanother step and stopped.

"Yes?" said Gait.

"Are . . . are you John Gait?" he asked too loudly.

"That's my name."

"Are you the John Gait?"

"Which one?"

"Did you speak on the radio?""When?"

"Don't let him fool you." The metallic voice was Dagny's and it wasaddressed to the leader. "He—is—John—Gait. I shall report the proof toheadquarters. You may proceed."

Gait turned to her as to a stranger. "Will you tell me now just who youare and what it was that you wanted here?"

Her face was as blank as the faces of the soldiers. "My name is DagnyTaggart. I wanted to convince myself that you are the man whom the country isseeking,"

He turned to the leader. "All right," he said. "I am John Gait—but if youwant me to answer you at all, keep your stool pigeon"—he pointed at Dagny—"away from me."

"Mr. Gait!" cried the leader with the sound of an enormous joviality.

"It is an honor to meet you, an honor and a privilege! Please, Mr. Gait,don't misunderstand us—we're ready to grant you your wishes—no, of course,you don't have to deal with Miss Taggart, if you prefer not to —Miss Taggartwas only trying to do her patriotic duty, but—"

"I said keep her away from me."

"We're not your enemies, Mr. Gait, I assure you we're not your enemies."He turned to Dagny. "Miss Taggart, you have performed an invaluable service

to the people. You have earned the highest form of public gratitude. Permitus to take over from here on." The soothing motions of his hands were urgingher to stand back, to keep out of Gait's sight."Now what do you want?" asked Gait.

"The nation is waiting for you, Mr. Gait. All we want is a chance todispel misapprehensions. Just a chance to co-operate with you." His glovedhand was waving a signal to his three men; the floorboards creaked, as themen proceeded silently to the task of opening drawers and closets; they weresearching the room. "The spirit of the nation will revive tomorrow morning,Mr. Gait, when they hear that you have been found."

"What do you want?"

"Just to greet you in the name of the people.""Am I under arrest?"

"Why think in such old-fashioned terms? Our job is only to escort yousafely to the top councils of the national leadership, where your presence isurgently needed." He paused, but got no answer. "The country's top leadersdesire to confer with you—just to confer and to reach a friendlyunderstanding."

The soldiers were finding nothing but garments and kitchen utensils; therewere no letters, no books, not even a newspaper, as if the room were thehabitation of an illiterate.

"Our objective is only to assist you to assume your rightful place insociety, Mr. Gait. You do not seem to realize your own public value."

"I do."

"We are here only to protect you."

"Locked!" declared a soldier, banging his fist against the laboratorydoor.

The leader assumed an ingratiating smile. "What is behind that door, Mr.Gait?"

"Private property."

"Would you open it, please?"

"No. "

The leader spread his hands out in a gesture of pained helplessness."Unfortunately, my hands are tied. Orders, you know. We have to enter thatroom."

"Enter it."

"It's only a formality, a mere formality. There's no reason why thingsshould not be handled amicably. Won't you please co-operate?""I said, no."

"I'm sure you wouldn't want us to resort to any . . . unnecessary means."He got no answer. "We have the authority to break that door down, you know-but, of course, we wouldn't want to do it." He waited, but got no answer."Force that lock!" he snapped to the soldier.

Dagny glanced at Gait's face. He stood impassively, his head held level,she saw the undisturbed lines of his profile, his eyes directed at the door.The lock was a small, square plate of polished copper, without keyhole orfixtures.

The silence and the sudden immobility of the three brutes wereinvoluntary, while the burglar's tools in the hands of the fourth wentgrating cautiously against the wood of the door.

The wood gave way easily, and small chips fell down, their thuds magnifiedby the silence into the rattle of a distant gun. When the burglar's jimmyattacked the copper plate, they heard a faint rustle behind the door, nolouder than the sigh of a weary mind. In another minute, the lock fell outand the door shuddered forward the width of an inch.

The soldier jumped back. The leader approached, his steps irregular likehiccoughs, and threw the door open. They faced a black hole of unknowncontent and unrelieved darkness.

They glanced at one another and at Gait; he did not move; he stood lookingat the darkness.

Dagny followed them, when they stepped over the threshold, preceded by thebeams of their flashlights. The space beyond was a long shell of metal, emptybut for heavy drifts of dust on the floor, an odd, grayish-white dust thatseemed to belong among ruins undisturbed for centuries. The room looked deadlike an empty skull.

She turned away, not to let them see in her face the scream of theknowledge of what that dust had been a few minutes ago. Don't try to openthat door, he had said to her at the entrance to the powerhouse of Atlantis .. . if you tried to break it down, the machinery inside would collapse intorubble long before the door would give way. . . . Don't try to open thatdoor—she was thinking, but knew that what she was now seeing was the visualform of the statement: Don't try to force a mind.

The men backed out in silence and went on backing toward the exit door,then stopped uncertainly, one after another, at random points of the garret,as if abandoned by a receding tide.

"Well," said Gait, reaching for his overcoat and turning to the leader,"let's go."

Three floors of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel had been evacuated andtransformed into an armed camp. Guards with machine guns stood at every turnof the long, velvet-carpeted corridors. Sentinels with bayonets stood on thelandings of the fire-stairways. The elevator doors of the fifty-ninth,sixtieth and sixty-first floors were padlocked; a single door and oneelevator were left as sole means of access, guarded by soldiers in fullbattle regalia. Peculiar-looking men loitered in the lobbies, restaurants andshops of the ground floor: their clothes were too new and too expensive, inunsuccessful imitation of the hotel's usual patrons, a camouflage impaired bythe fact that the clothes were badly fitted to their wearers' husky figuresand were further distorted by bulges in places where the garments ofbusinessmen have no cause to bulge, but the garments of gunmen have. Groupsof guards with Tommy guns were posted at every entrance and exit of thehotel, as well as at strategic windows of the adjoining streets.

In the center of this camp, on the sixtieth floor, in what was known asthe royal suite of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, amidst satin drapes, crystalcandelabra and sculptured garlands of Sowers, John Gait, dressed in slacksand shirt, sat in a brocaded armchair, one leg stretched out on a velvethassock, his hands crossed behind his head, looking at the ceiling.

This was the posture in which Mr. Thompson found him, when the fourguards, who had stood outside the door of the royal suite since five A.M.,opened it at eleven A.M. to admit Mr. Thompson, and locked it again.

Mr. Thompson experienced a brief flash of uneasiness when the click of thelock cut off his escape and left him alone with the prisoner. But heremembered the newspaper headlines and the radio voices, which had beenannouncing to the country since dawn: "John Gait is found!—John Gait is inNew York!—John Gait has joined the people's cause!—John Gait is in conferencewith the country's leaders, working for a speedy solution of all ourproblems!"—and he made himself feel that he believed it.

"Well, well, well!" he said brightly, marching up to the armchair.

"So you're the young fellow who's started all the trouble—Oh," he saidsuddenly, as he got a closer look at the dark green eyes watching him. "Well,I . . .I'm tickled pink to meet you, Mr. Gait, just tickled pink." He added,"I'm Mr. Thompson, you know."

"How do you do," said Gait.

Mr. Thompson thudded down on a chair, the brusqueness of the movementsuggesting a cheerily businesslike attitude. "Now don't go imagining thatyou're under arrest or some such nonsense." He pointed at the room. "This isno jail, as you can see. You can see that we'll treat you right. You're a bigperson, a very big person—and we know it.

Just make yourself at home. Ask for anything you please. Fire any flunkythat doesn't obey you. And if you take a dislike to any of the army boysoutside, just breathe the word—and we'll send another one to replace him."

He paused expectantly. He received no answer.

"The only reason we brought you here is just that we wanted to talk toyou. We wouldn't have done it this way, but you left us no choice. You kepthiding. And all we wanted was a chance to tell you that you got us allwrong."

He spread his hands out, palms up, with a disarming smile. Gait's eyeswere watching him, without answer.

"That was some speech you made. Boy, are you an orator! You've donesomething to the country—I don't know what or why, but you have. People seemto want something you've got. But you thought we'd be dead set against it?That's where you're wrong. We're not. Personally, I think there was plenty inthat speech that made sense. Yes, sir, I do. Of course, I don't agree withevery word you said—but what the hell, you don't expect us to agree witheverything, do you? Differences of opinion—that's what makes horse racing.Me, I'm always willing to change my mind. I'm open to any argument."

He leaned forward invitingly. He obtained no answer.

"The world is in a hell of a mess. Just as you said. There, I agree withyou. We have a point in common. We can start from that. Something's got to bedone about it. All I wanted was—Look," he cried suddenly, "why don't you letme talk to you?"

"You are talking to me."

"I . . . well, that is . . . well, you know what I mean.""Fully."

"Well? . . . Well, what have you got to say?"

"Nothing."

"Huh? ! "

"Nothing."

"Oh, come now!"

"I didn't seek to talk to you."

"But . . . but look! ... we have things to discuss!""I haven't."

"Look," said Mr. Thompson, after a pause, "you're a man of action.A practical man. Boy, are you a practical man! Whatever else I don't quiteget about you, I'm sure of that. Now aren't you?""Practical? Yes."

"Well, so am I. We can talk straight We can put our cards on the table.Whatever it is you're after, I'm offering you a deal.""I'm always open to a deal."

"I knew it!" cried Mr. Thompson triumphantly, slamming his fist down onhis own knee. "I told them so—all those fool intellectual theorizers, likeWesley!"

"I'm always open to a deal—with anyone who has a value to offer me."Mr. Thompson could not tell what made him miss a beat before he answered,"Well, write your own ticket, brother! Write your own ticket!""What have you got to offer me?""Why—anything.""Such as?"

"Anything you name. Have you heard our short-wave broadcasts to you?""Yes."

"We said we'll meet your terms, any terms. We meant it."

"Have you heard me say on the radio that I have no terms to bargain about?I meant it."

"Oh, but look, you misunderstood us! You thought we'd fight you.

But we won't. We're not that rigid. We're willing to consider any idea.

Why didn't you answer our calls and come to a conference?"

"Why should I?"

"Because . . . because we wanted to speak to you in the name of thecountry. "

"I don't recognize your right to speak in the name of the country.""Now look here, I'm not used to . . . Well, okay, won't you just give me ahearing? Won't you listen?""I'm listening."

"The country is in a terrible state. People are starving and giving up,the economy is falling to pieces, nobody is producing any longer.

We don't know what to do about it. You do. You know how to make thingswork. Okay, we're ready to give in. We want you to tell us what to do."

"I told you what to do."

"What?"

"Get out of the way."

"That's impossible! That's fantastic! That's out of the question!""You see? I told you we had nothing to discuss."

"Now, wait! Wait! Don't go to extremes! There's always a middle ground.You can't have everything. We aren't . . . people aren't ready for it. Youcan't expect us to ditch the machinery of State.

We've got to preserve the system. But we're willing to amend it. We'llmodify it any way you wish. We're not stubborn, theoretical dogmatists—we'reflexible. We'll do anything you say. We'll give you a free hand. We'll co-operate. We'll compromise. We'll split fifty-fifty. We'll keep the sphere ofpolitics and give you total power over the sphere of economics. We'll turnthe production, of the country over to you, we'll make you a present of theentire economy. You'll run it any way you wish, you'll give the orders,you'll issue the directives—and you'll have the organized power of the Stateat your command to enforce your decisions. We'll stand ready to obey you, allof us, from me on down. In the field of production, we'll do whatever yousay. You'll be—you'll be the Economic Dictator of the nation!"

Gait burst out laughing.

It was the simple amusement of the laughter that shocked Mr.

Thompson. "What's the matter with you?"

"So that's your idea of a compromise, is it?"

"What's the . . . ? Don't sit there grinning like that! ... I don'tthink you understood me. I'm offering you Wesley Mouch's job—and there'snothing bigger that anyone could offer you! . . . You'll be free to doanything you wish. If you don't like controls—repeal them. If you want higherprofits and lower wages—decree them. If you want special privileges for thebig tycoons—grant them. If you don't like labor unions—dissolve them. If youwant a free economy—order people to be free! Play it any way you please. Butget things going. Get the country organized. Make people work again. Makethem produce.

Bring back your own men—the men of brains. Lead us to a peaceful,scientific, industrial age and to prosperity.""At the point of a gun?"

"Now look, I . . . Now what's so damn funny about it?"

"Will you tell me just one thing: if you're able to pretend that youhaven't heard a word I said on the radio, what makes you think I'd be willingto pretend that I haven't said it?"

"I don't know what you mean! I—"

"Skip it. It was just a rhetorical question. The first part of it answersthe second.""Huh?"

"I don't play your kind of games, brother—if you want a translation.""Do you mean that you're refusing my offer?""I am.""But why?"

"It took me three hours on the radio to tell you why.""Oh, that's just theory! I'm talking business. I'm offering you thegreatest job in the world. Will you tell me what's wrong with it?""What I told you, in three hours, was that it won't work.""You can make it work.""How?"

Mr. Thompson spread his hands out. "I don't know. If I did, I wouldn'tcome to you. It's for you to figure out. You're the industrial genius. Youcan solve anything."

"I said it can't be done."

"You could do it"

"How?"

"Somehow." He heard Gait's chuckle, and added, "Why not? Just tell me whynot?"

"Okay, I'll tell you. You want me to be the Economic Dictator?""Yes ! "

"And you'd obey any order I give?""Implicitly!"

"Then start by abolishing all income taxes."

"Oh, no!" screamed Mr. Thompson, leaping to his feet. "We couldn't dothat! That's . . . that's not the field of production. That's the field ofdistribution. How would we pay government employees?"

"Fire your government employees."

"Oh, no! That's politics! That's not economics! You can't interfere withpolitics! You can't have everything!"

Gait crossed his legs on the hassock, stretching himself more comfortablyin the brocaded armchair. "Want to continue the discussion?

Or do you get the point?"

"I only—" He stopped.

"Are you satisfied that I got the point?"

"Look," said Mr. Thompson placatingly, resuming the edge of his seat. "Idon't want to argue. I'm no good at debates. I'm a man of action. Time isshort. All I know is that you've got a mind. Just the sort of mind we need.You can do anything. You could make things work if you wanted to."

"All right, put it your own way: I don't want to. I don't want to be anEconomic Dictator, not even long enough to issue that order for people to befree—which any rational human being would throw back in my face, because he'dknow that his rights are not to be held, given or received by your permissionor mine."

"Tell me," said Mr. Thompson, looking at him reflectively, "what is ityou're after?"

"I told you on the radio."

"I don't get it. You said that you're out for your own selfish interest —and that, I can understand. But what can you possibly want in the future thatyou couldn't get right now, from us, handed down to you on a platter? Ithought you were an egoist—and a practical man. I offer you a blank check onanything you wish—and you tell me that you don't want it, Why?"

"Because there are no funds behind your blank check."

"What?"

"Because you have no value to offer me."

"I can offer you anything you can ask. Just name it.""You name it."

"Well, you talked a lot about wealth. If it's money that you want—you couldn't make in three lifetimes what I can hand over to you in a

minute, this minute, cash on the barrel. Want a billion dollars—a cool, neat

billion dollars?"

"Which I'll have to produce, for you to give me?"

"No, I mean straight out of the public treasury, in fresh, new bills . . .or ... or even in gold, if you prefer.""What will it buy me?"

"Oh, look, when the country gets back on its feet—""When I put it back on its feet?"

"Well, if what you want is to run things your own way, if it's power thatyou're after, I'll guarantee you that every man, woman and child in thiscountry will obey your orders and do whatever you wish."

"After I teach them to do it?"

"If you want anything for your own gang—for all those men who'vedisappeared—jobs, positions, authority, tax exemptions, any special favor atall—just name it and they'll get it."

"After I bring them back?"

"Well, what on earth do you want?"

"What on earth do I need you for?"

"Huh?"

"What have you got to offer me that I couldn't get without you?"

There was a different look in Mr. Thompson's eyes when he drew back, as ifcornered, yet looked straight at Gait for the first time and said slowly,"Without me, you couldn't get out of this room, right now."

Gait smiled. "True."

"You wouldn't be able to produce anything. You could be left here tostarve.""True."

"Well, don't you see?" The loudness of homey joviality came back into Mr.Thompson's voice, as if the hint given and received were now to be safelyevaded by means of humor. "What I've got to offer you is your life."

"It's not yours to offer, Mr. Thompson," said Gait softly.

Something about his voice made Mr. Thompson jerk to glance at him, thenjerk faster to look away: Gait's smile seemed almost gentle.

"Now," said Gait, "do you see what I meant when I said that a zero can'thold a mortgage over life? It's I who'd have to grant you that kind ofmortgage—and I don't. The removal of a threat is not a payment, the negationof a negative is not a reward, the withdrawal of your armed hoodlums is notan incentive, the offer not to murder me is not a value."

"Who . . . who's said anything about murdering you?"

"Who's said anything about anything else? If you weren't holding me hereat the point of a gun, under threat of death, you wouldn't have a chance tospeak to me at all. And that is as much as your guns can accomplish. I don'tpay for the removal of threats. I don't buy my life from anyone."

"That's not true," said Mr. Thompson brightly. "If you had a broken leg,you'd pay a doctor to set it."

"Not if he was the one who broke it." He smiled at Mr. Thompson's silence."I'm a practical man, Mr. Thompson. I don't think it's practical to establisha person whose sole means of livelihood is the breaking of my bones. I don'tthink it's practical to support a protection racket."

Mr. Thompson looked thoughtful, then shook his head. "I don't think you'repractical," he said. "A practical man doesn't ignore the facts of reality. Hedoesn't waste his time wishing things to be different or trying to change

them. He takes things as they are. We're holding you. It's a fact. Whetheryou like it or not, it's a fact. You should act accordingly.""I am."

"What I mean is, you should co-operate. You should recognize an existingsituation, accept it and adjust to it."

"If you had blood poisoning, would you adjust to it or act to change it?""Oh, that's different! That's physical!"

"You mean, physical facts are open to correction, but your whims are not?""Huh?"

"You mean, physical nature can be adjusted to men, but your whims areabove the laws of nature, and men must adjust to you?""I mean that I hold the upper hand!""With a gun in it?""Oh, forget about guns! I—"

"I can't forget a fact of reality, Mr. Thompson. That would beimpractical."

"All right, then: I hold a gun. What are you going to do about it?"

"I'll act accordingly. I'll obey you."

"What?"

"I'll do whatever you tell me to.""Do you mean it?"

"I mean it. Literally." He saw the eagerness of Mr. Thompson's face ebbslowly under a look of bewilderment. "I will perform any motion you order meto perform. If you order me to move into the office of an Economic Dictator,I'll move into it. If you order me to sit at a desk, I will sit at it. If youorder me to issue a directive, I will issue the directive you order me toissue. "

"Oh, but I don't know what directives to issue!""I don't, either."There was a long pause.

"Well?" said Gait. "What are your orders?"

"I want you to save the economy of the country!"

"I don't know how to save it."

"I want you to find a way!"

"I don't know how to find it."

"I want you to think!"

"How will your gun make me do that, Mr. Thompson?"

Mr. Thompson looked at him silently—and Gait saw, in the tightened lips,in the jutting chin, in the narrowed eyes, the look of an adolescent bullyabout to utter that philosophical argument which is expressed by thesentence: I'll bash your teeth in. Gait smiled, looking straight at him, asif hearing the unspoken sentence and underscoring it. Mr.

Thompson looked away.

"No," said Gait, "you don't want me to think. When you force a man to actagainst his own choice and judgment, it's his thinking that you want him tosuspend. You want him to become a robot. I shall comply."

Mr. Thompson sighed. "I don't get it," he said in a tone of genuinehelplessness. "Something's off and I can't figure it out. Why should you askfor trouble? With a brain like yours—you can beat anybody.

I'm no match for you, and you know it. Why don't you pretend to join us,then gain control and outsmart me?"

"For the same reason that makes you offer it: because you'd win."

"Huh?"

"Because it's the attempt of your betters to beat you on your terms thathas allowed your kind to get away with it for centuries.

Which one of us would succeed, if I were to compete with you for controlover your musclemen? Sure, I could pretend—and I wouldn't save your economy

or your system, nothing will save them now—but I'd perish and what you'd winwould be what you've always won in the past: a postponement, one more stay ofexecution, for another year—or month—bought at the price of whatever hope andeffort might still be squeezed out of the best of the human remnants leftaround you, including me. That's all you're after and that is the length ofyour range. A month? You'd settle for a week—on the unchallenged absolutethat there will always be another victim to find. But you've found your lastvictim—the one who refuses to play his historical part. The game is up,brother."

"Oh, that's just theory!" snapped Mr. Thompson, a little too sharply; hiseyes were roving about the room, in the manner of a substitute for pacing; heglanced at the door, as if longing to escape. "You say that if we don't giveup the system, we'll perish?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Then, since we're holding you, you will perish with us?""Possibly."

"Don't you want to live?"

"Passionately." He saw the snap of a spark in Mr. Thompson's eyes andsmiled. "I'll tell you more: I know that I want to live much more intenselythan you do. I know that that's what you're counting on. I know that you, infact, do not want to live at all. I want it. And because I want it so much, Iwill accept no substitute."

Mr. Thompson jumped to his feet. "That's not true!" he cried. "My notwanting to live—it's not true! Why do you talk like that?" He stood, hislimbs drawn faintly together, as if against a sudden chill.

"Why do you say such things? I don't know what you mean." He backed a fewsteps away. "And it's not true that I'm a gunman. I'm not. I don't intend toharm you. I never intended to harm anybody. I want people to like me. I wantto be your friend ... I want to be your friend!" he cried to the space atlarge.

Gait's eyes were watching him, without expression, giving him no clue to

what they were seeing, except that they were seeing it.

Mr. Thompson jerked suddenly into bustling, unnecessary motions, as if he

were in a hurry, "I've got to run along," he said. "I ... 1

have so many appointments. We'll talk about it some more. Think it over.

Take your time. I'm not trying to high-pressure you. Just relax, take it easy

and make yourself at home. Ask for anything you like-food, drinks, cigarettes, the best of anything." He waved his hand at

Gait's garments. "I'm going to order the most expensive tailor in the city to

make some decent clothes for you. I want you to get used to the best. I want

you to be comfortable and . . . Say, " he asked, a little too casually, "have

you got any family? Any relatives you'd like to see?""No. "

"Any friends?""No. "

"Have you got a sweetheart?""No. "

"It's just that I wouldn't want you to get lonesome. We can let you havevisitors, any visitor you name, if there's anyone you care for.""There isn't"

Mr. Thompson paused at the door, turned to look at Gait for a moment andshook his head. "I can't figure you out," he said. "I just can't figure youout. "

Gait smiled, shrugged and answered, "Who is John Gait?"

A whirling mesh of sleet hung over the entrance of the Wayne-FalklandHotel, and the armed guards looked oddly, desolately helpless in the circleof light: they stood hunched, heads down, hugging their guns for warmth—as

if, were they to release all the spitting violence of their bullets at thestorm, it would not bring comfort to their bodies.

From across the street, Chick Morrison, the Morale Conditioner—

on his way to a conference on the fifty-ninth floor—noted that the rare,lethargic passers-by were not taking the trouble to glance at the guards, asthey did not take the trouble to glance at the soggy headlines of a pile ofunsold newspapers on the stand of a ragged, shivering vendor: "John GaitPromises Prosperity."

Chick Morrison shook his head uneasily: six days of front-page stories—about the united efforts of the country's leaders working with John Gait toshape new policies—had brought no results. People were moving, he observed,as if they did not care to see anything around them. No one took any noticeof his existence, except a ragged old woman who stretched out her hand to himsilently, as he approached the lights of the entrance; he hurried past, andonly drops of sleet fell on the gnarled, naked palm.

It was his memory of the streets that gave a jagged sound to ChickMorrison's voice, when he spoke to a circle of faces in Mr. Thompson's roomon the fifty-ninth floor. The look of the faces matched the sound of hisvoice.

"It doesn't seem to work," he said, pointing to a pile of reports from hispublic-pulse-takers. "All the press releases about our collaborating withJohn Gait don't seem to make any difference. People don't care. They don'tbelieve a word of it. Some of them say that he'll never collaborate with us.Most of them don't even believe that we've got him. I don't know what'shappened to people. They don't believe anything any more." He sighed. "Threefactories went out of business in Cleveland, day before yesterday. Fivefactories closed in Chicago yesterday. In San Francisco—"

"I know, I know," snapped Mr. Thompson, tightening the muffler around histhroat: the building's furnace had gone out of order.

"There's no choice about it: he's got to give in and take over. He's gotto! "

Wesley Mouch glanced at the ceiling. "Don't ask me to talk to him again,"he said, and shuddered. "I've tried. One can't talk to that man."

"I ... I can't, Mr. Thompson!" cried Chick Morrison, in answer to thestop of Mr. Thompson's roving glance. "I'll resign, if you want me to! Ican't talk to him again! Don't make me!"

"Nobody can talk to him," said Dr. Floyd Ferris. "It's a waste of time. Hedoesn't hear a word you say."

Fred Kinnan chuckled. "You mean, he hears too much, don't you?

And what's worse, he answers it."

"Well, why don't you try it again?" snapped Mouch. "You seem to haveenjoyed it. Why don't you try to persuade him?"

"I know better," said Kinnan. "Don't fool yourself, brother. Nobody'sgoing to persuade him. I won't try it twice. . . . Enjoyed it?" he added,with a look of astonishment. "Yeah . . . yeah, I guess I did."

"What's the matter with you? Are you falling for him? Are you letting himwin you over?"

"Me?" Kinnan chuckled mirthlessly. "What use would he have for me? I'll bethe first one to go down the drain when he wins. . . . It's only"—he glancedwistfully up at the ceiling—"it's only that he's a man who talks straight."

"He won't win!" snapped Mr. Thompson. "It's out of the question!"

There was a long pause.

"There are hunger riots in West Virginia," said Wesley Mouch. "And thefarmers in Texas have—"

"Mr. Thompson!" said Chick Morrison desperately. "Maybe . . .

maybe we could let the public see him . . . at a mass rally ... or maybeon TV . . . just see him, just so they'd believe that we've really got him. .

. . It would give people hope, for a while ... it would give us a littletime. . . ."

"Too dangerous," snapped Dr. Ferris. "Don't let him come anywhere near thepublic. There's no limit to what he'll permit himself to do."

"He's got to give in," said Mr. Thompson stubbornly. "He's got to join us.One of you must—"

"No!" screamed Eugene Lawson. "Not me! I don't want to see him at all! Notonce! I don't want to have to believe it!"

"What?" asked James Taggart; his voice had a note of dangerously recklessmockery; Lawson did not answer. "What are you scared of?"

The contempt in Taggart's voice sounded abnormally stressed, as if thesight of someone's greater fear were tempting him to defy his own.

"What is it you're scared to believe, Gene?"

"I won't believe it! I won't!" Lawson's voice was half-snarl, halfwhimper. "You can't make me lose my faith in humanity! You shouldn't permitsuch a man to be possible! A ruthless egoist who—"

"You're a fine bunch of intellectuals, you are," said Mr. Thompsonscornfully. "I thought you could talk to him in his own lingo—but he's scaredthe lot of you. Ideas? Where are your ideas now? Do something! Make him joinus! Win him over!"

"Trouble is, he doesn't want anything," said Mouch. "What can we offer aman who doesn't want anything?"

"You mean," said Kinnan, "what can we offer a man who wants to live?"

"Shut up!" screamed James Taggart. "Why did you say that? What made yousay it?"

"What made you scream?" asked Kinnan.

"Keep quiet, all of you!" ordered Mr. Thompson. "You're fine at fightingone another, but when it comes to fighting a real man—""So he's got you, too?" yelled Lawson.

"Aw, pipe down," said Mr. Thompson wearily. "He's the toughest bastardI've ever been up against. You wouldn't understand that. He's as hard as theycome . . ." The faintest tinge of admiration crept into his voice. "As hardas they come . . ."

"There are ways to persuade tough bastards," drawled Dr. Ferris casually,"as I've explained to you."

"No!" cried Mr. Thompson. "No! Shut up! I won't listen to you!

I won't hear of it!" His hands moved frantically, as if struggling todispel something he would not name. "I told him . . . that that's not true .. . that we're not . . . that I'm not a . . . " He shook his head violently,as if his own words were some unprecedented form of danger. "No, look, boys,what I mean is, we've got to be practical . . . and cautious. Damn cautious.We've got to handle it peacefully.

We can't afford to antagonize him or ... or harm him. We don't dare takeany chances on . . . anything happening to him. Because . . . because, if hegoes, we go. He's our last hope. Make no mistake about it. If he goes, weperish. You all know it." His eyes swept over the faces around him: they knewit.

The sleet of the following morning fell down on front-page storiesannouncing that a constructive, harmonious conference between John Gait andthe country's leaders, on the previous afternoon, had produced "The John GaitPlan," soon to be announced. The snowflakes of the evening fell down upon thefurniture of an apartment house whose front wall had collapsed—and upon acrowd of men waiting silently at the closed cashier's window of a plant whoseowner had vanished.

"The farmers of South Dakota," Wesley Mouch reported to Mr.

Thompson, next morning, "are marching on the state capital, burning everygovernment building on their way, and every home worth more than ten thousanddollars."

"California's blown to pieces," he reported in the evening. "There's acivil war going on there—if that's what it is, which nobody seems to be sureof. They've declared that they're seceding from the Union, but nobody knowswho's now in power. There's armed fighting all over the state, between a'People's Party, ' led by Ma Chalmers and her soybean cult of Orient-admirers—and something called 'Back to God,'

led by some former oil-field owners."

"Miss Taggart!" moaned Mr. Thompson, when she entered his hotel room nextmorning, in answer to his summons. "What are we going to do?"

He wondered why he had once felt that she possessed some reassuring kindof energy. He was looking at a blank face that seemed composed, but thecomposure became disquieting when one noticed that it lasted for minute afterminute, with no change of expression, no sign of feeling. Her face had thesame look as all the others, he thought, except for something in the set ofthe mouth that suggested endurance.

"I trust you, Miss Taggart. You've got more brains than all my boys," hepleaded. "You've done more for the country than any of them—it's you whofound him for us. What are we to do? With everything falling to pieces, he'sthe only one who can lead us out of this mess—but he won't. He refuses. Hesimply refuses to lead. I've never seen anything like it: a man who has nodesire to command. We beg him to give orders—and he answers that he wants toobey them! It's preposterous!"

"It is."

"What do you make of it? Can you figure him out?"

"He's an arrogant egoist," she said. "He's an ambitious adventurer.He's a man of unlimited audacity who's playing for the biggest stakes inthe world."

It was easy, she thought. It would have been difficult in that distanttime when she had regarded language as a tool of honor, always to be used asif one were under oath—an oath of allegiance to reality and to respect forhuman beings. Now it was only a matter of making sounds, inarticulate soundsaddressed to inanimate objects unrelated to such concepts as reality, humanor honor.

It had been easy, that first morning, to report to Mr. Thompson how shehad traced John Gait to his home. It had been easy to watch Mr.

Thompson's gulping smiles and his repeated cries of "That's my girl!"uttered with glances of triumph at his assistants, the triumph of a man whosejudgment in trusting her had been vindicated. It had been easy to express anangry hatred for Gait—"I used to agree with his ideas, but I won't let himdestroy my railroad!"—and to hear Mr.

Thompson say, "Don't you worry, Miss Taggart! We'll protect you from him!"

It had been easy to assume a look of cold shrewdness and to remind Mr.Thompson of the five-hundred-thousand-dollar reward, her voice clear andcutting, like the sound of an adding machine punching out the sum of a bill.She had seen an instant's pause in Mr. Thompson's facial muscles, then abrighter, broader smile—like a silent speech declaring that he had notexpected it, but was delighted to know what made her tick and that it was thekind of ticking he understood.

"Of course, Miss Taggart! Certainly! That reward is yours—all yours!

The check will be sent to you, in full!"

It had been easy, because she had felt as if she were in some dreary non-world, where her words and actions were not facts any longer—not reflectionsof reality, but only distorted postures in one of those side-show mirrorsthat project deformity for the perception of beings whose consciousness is

not to be treated as consciousness. Thin, single and hot, like the burningpressure of a wire within her, like a needle selecting her course, was heronly concern: the thought of his safety. The rest was a blur of shapelessdissolution, half-acid, half fog.

But this—she thought with a shudder—was the state in which they lived, allthose people whom she had never understood, this was the state they desired,this rubber reality, this task of pretending, distorting, deceiving, with thecredulous stare of some Mr. Thompson's panic-bleary eyes as one's onlypurpose and reward. Those who desired this state—she wondered—did they wantto live?

"The biggest stakes in the world, Miss Taggart?" Mr. Thompson was askingher anxiously. "What is it? What does he want?""Reality. This earth."

"I don't know quite what you mean, but . . . Look, Miss Taggart, if youthink you can understand him, would you . . . would you try to speak to himonce more?"

She felt as if she heard her own voice, many light-years away, crying thatshe would give her life to see him—but in this room, she heard the voice of ameaningless stranger saying coldly, "No, Mr.

Thompson, I wouldn't. I hope I'll never have to see him again."

"I know that you can't stand him, and I can't say I blame you, butcouldn't you just try to—"

"I tried to reason with him, the night I found him. I heard nothing butinsults in return. I think he resents me more than he'd resent anyone else.He won't forgive me the fact that it was I who trapped him.

I'd be the last person to whom he would surrender."

"Yeah . . . yeah, that's true. ... Do you think he will ever surrender?"

The needle within her wavered for a moment, burning its oscillating waybetween two courses: should she say that he would not, and see them killhim?—should she say that he would, and see them hold onto their power tillthey destroyed the world?

"He will," she said firmly. "He'll give in, if you treat him right.

He's too ambitious to refuse power. Don't let him escape, but don'tthreaten him—or harm him. Fear won't work. He's impervious to fear."

"But what if ... I mean, with the way things are collapsing . . .

what if he holds out too long?"

"He won't. He's too practical for that. By the way, are you letting himhear any news about the state of the country?""Why . . . no."

"I would suggest that you let him have copies of your confidentialreports. He'll see that it won't be long now."

"That's a good idea! A very good idea! . . . You know, Miss Taggart," hesaid suddenly, with the sound of some desperate clinging hi his voice, "Ifeel better whenever I talk to you. It's because I trust you. I don't trustanybody around me. But you—you're different.

You're solid."

She was looking unflinchingly straight at him. "Thank you, Mr.Thompson," she said.

It had been easy, she thought—until she walked out into the street andnoticed that under her coat, her blouse was sticking damply to her shoulderblades.

Were she able to feel—she thought as she walked through the concourse ofthe Terminal—she would know that the heavy indifference she now felt for herrailroad was hatred. She could not get rid of the feeling that she wasrunning nothing but freight trains: the passengers, to her, were not livingor human. It seemed senseless to waste such enormous effort on preventingcatastrophes, on protecting the mi safety of trains carrying nothing but

inanimate objects. She looked at the faces in the Terminal: if he were todie, she thought, to be murdered by the rulers of their system, that thesemight continue to eat, sleep and travel—would she work to provide them withtrains? If she were to scream for their help, would one of them rise to hisdefense?

Did they want him to live, they who had heard him?

The check for five hundred thousand dollars was delivered to her office,that afternoon; it was delivered with a bouquet of flowers from Mr. Thompson.She looked at the check and let it flutter down to her desk: it meant nothingand made her feel nothing, not even a suggestion of guilt. It was a scrap ofpaper, of no greater significance than the ones in the office wastebasket.Whether it could buy a diamond necklace or the city dump or the last of herfood, made no difference. It would never be spent. It was not a token ofvalue and nothing it purchased could be a value. But this—she thought—thisinanimate indifference was the permanent state of the people around her, ofmen who had no purpose and no passion. This was the state of a non-valuingsoul; those who chose it—she wondered—did they want to live?

The lights were out of order in the hall of the apartment house, when shecame home that evening, numb with exhaustion—and she did not notice theenvelope at her feet until she switched on the light in her foyer. It was ablank, sealed envelope that had been slipped under her door. She picked itup—and then, within a moment, she was laughing soundlessly, half-kneeling,half-sitting on the floor, not to move off that spot, not to do anything butstare at the note written by a hand she knew, the hand that had written itslast message on the calendar above the city. The note said: Dagny: Sit tight.Watch them. When he'll need our help, call me at OR 6-5693.

F.

The newspapers of the following morning admonished the public not tobelieve the rumors that there was any trouble in the Southern states. Theconfidential reports, sent to Mr. Thompson, stated that armed fighting hadbroken out between Georgia and Alabama, for the possession of a factorymanufacturing electrical equipment—a factory cut off by the fighting and byblasted railroad tracks from any source of raw materials.

"Have you read the confidential reports I sent you?" moaned Mr.

Thompson, that evening, facing Gait once more. He was accompanied by JamesTaggart, who had volunteered to meet the prisoner for the first time.

Gait sat on a straight-backed chair, his legs crossed, smoking acigarette. He seemed erect and relaxed, together. They could not decipher theexpression on his face, except that it showed no sign of apprehension.

"I have," he answered.

"There's not much time left," said Mr. Thompson."There isn't."

"Are you going to let such things go on?""Are you?"

"How can you be so sure you're right?" cried James Taggart; his voice wasnot loud, but it had the intensity of a cry. "How can you take it uponyourself, at a terrible time like this, to stick to your own ideas at therisk of destroying the whole world?"

"Whose ideas should I consider safer to follow?"

"How can you be sure you're right? How can you know? Nobody can be sure ofhis knowledge! Nobody! You're no better than anyone else!""Then why do you want me?"

"How can you gamble with other people's lives? How can you permit yourselfsuch a selfish luxury as to hold out, when people need you?""You mean: when they need my ideas?"

"Nobody is fully right or wrong! There isn't any black or white!You don't have a monopoly on truth!"

There was something wrong in Taggart's manner—thought Mr.

Thompson, frowning—some odd, too personal resentment, as if it were not apolitical issue that he had come here to solve.

"If you had any sense of responsibility," Taggart was saying, "youwouldn't dare take such a chance on nothing but your own judgment!

You would join us and consider some ideas other than your own and admitthat we might be right, too! You would help us with our plans!

You would—"

Taggart went on speaking with feverish insistence, but Mr. Thompson couldnot tell whether Gait was listening: Gait had risen and was pacing the room,not in a manner of restlessness, but in the casual manner of a man enjoyingthe motion of his own body. Mr. Thompson noted the lightness of the steps,the straight spine, the flat stomach, the relaxed shoulders. Gait walked asif he were both unconscious of his body and tremendously conscious of hispride in it. Mr. Thompson glanced at James Taggart, at the sloppy posture ofa tall figure slumped in ungainly self-distortion, and caught him watchingGait's movements with such hatred that Mr. Thompson sat up, fearing it wouldbecome audible in the room. But Gait was not looking at Taggart.

". . . your conscience!" Taggart was saying. "I came here to appeal toyour conscience! How can you value your mind above thousands of human lives?People are perishing and—Oh, for Christ's sake," he snapped, "stop pacing!"

Gait stopped. "Is this an order?"

"No, no!" said Mr. Thompson hastily. "It's not an order. We don't want togive you orders. . . . Take it easy, Jim."

Gait resumed his pacing. "The world is collapsing," said Taggart, his eyesfollowing Gait irresistibly. "People are perishing—and it's you who couldsave them! Does it matter who's right or wrong? You should join us, even ifyou think we're wrong, you should sacrifice your mind to save them!"

"By what means will I then save them?"

"Who do you think you are?" cried Taggart.

Gait stopped. "You know it."

"You're an egoist!"

"I am."

"Do you realize what sort of egoist you are?""Do you?" asked Gait, looking straight at him.

It was the slow withdrawal of Taggart's body into the depth of hisarmchair, while his eyes were holding Gait's, that made Mr. Thompsonunaccountably afraid of the next moment.

"Say," Mr. Thompson interrupted in a brightly casual voice, "what sort ofcigarette are you smoking?"

Gait turned to him and smiled. "I don't know."

"Where did you get it?"

"One of your guards brought me a package of them. He said some man askedhim to give it to me as a present. . . . Don't worry," he added, "your boyshave put it through every kind of test. There were no hidden messages. It wasjust a present from an anonymous admirer."

The cigarette between Gait's fingers bore the sign of the dollar.

James Taggart was no good at the job of persuasion, Mr. Thompsonconcluded. But Chick Morrison, whom he brought the next day, did no better.

"I . . . I'll just throw myself on your mercy, Mr. Gait," said ChickMorrison with a frantic smile. "You're right. I'll concede that you're right—and all I can appeal to is your pity. Deep down in my heart, I can't believethat you're a total egoist who feels no pity for the people." He pointed to apile of papers he had spread on a table.

"Here's a plea signed by ten thousand schoolchildren, begging you to joinus and save them. Here's a plea from a home for the crippled.

Here's a petition sent by the ministers of two hundred different faiths-Here's an appeal from the mothers of the country. Read them.""Is this an order?"

"No!" cried Mr. Thompson. "It's not an order!"

Gait remained motionless, not extending his hand for the papers.

"These are just plain, ordinary people, Mr. Gait," said Chick Morrison ina tone intended to project their abject humility. "They can't tell you whatto do. They wouldn't know. They're merely begging you. They may be weak,helpless, blind, ignorant. But you, who are so intelligent and strong, can'tyou take pity on them? Can't you help them?"

"By dropping my intelligence and following their blindness?"

"They may be wrong, but they don't know any better!"

"But I, who do, should obey them?"

"I can't argue, Mr. Gait. I'm just begging for your pity. They'resuffering. I'm begging you to pity those who suffer. I'm . . . Mr.

Gait," he asked, noticing that Gait was looking off at the distance beyondthe window and that his eyes were suddenly implacable, "what's the matter?What are you thinking of?"

"Hank Rearden."

"Uh . . . why?"

"Did they feel any pity for Hank Rearden?""Oh, but that's different! He-""Shut up," said Gait evenly."I only-"

"Shut up!" snapped Mr. Thompson. "Don't mind him, Mr. Gait.

He hasn't slept for two nights. He's scared out of his wits."

Dr. Floyd Ferris, next day, did not seem to be scared—but it was worse,thought Mr. Thompson. He observed that Gait remained silent and would notanswer Ferris at all.

"It's the question of moral responsibility that you might not have studiedsufficiently, Mr. Gait," Dr. Ferris was drawling in too airy, too forced atone of casual informality. "You seem to have talked on the radio aboutnothing but sins of commission. But there are also the sins of omission toconsider. To fail to save a Me is as immoral as to murder. The consequencesare the same—and since we must judge actions by their consequences, the moralresponsibility is the same.

. . . For instance, in view of the desperate shortage of food, it has beensuggested that it might become necessary to issue a directive ordering thatevery third one of all children under the age of ten and of all adults overthe age of sixty be put to death, to secure the survival of the rest. Youwouldn't want this to happen, would you?

You can prevent it. One word from you would prevent it. If you refuse andall those people are executed—it will be your fault and your moralresponsibility!"

"You're crazy!" screamed Mr. Thompson, recovering from shock and leapingto his feet. "Nobody's ever suggested any such thing! Nobody's everconsidered it! Please, Mr. Gait! Don't believe him! He doesn't mean it!"

"Oh yes, he does," said Gait. "Tell the bastard to look at me, then lookin the mirror, then ask himself whether I would ever think that my moralstature is at the mercy of his actions."

"Get out of here!" cried Mr. Thompson, yanking Ferris to his feet.

"Get out! Don't let me hear another squeak out of you!" He flung the dooropen and pushed Ferris at the startled face of a guard outside.

Turning to Gait, he spread his arms and let them drop with a gesture ofdrained helplessness. Gait's face was expressionless.

"Look," said- Mr. Thompson pleadingly, "isn't there anybody who can talkto you?"

"There's nothing to talk about."

"We've got to. We've got to convince you. Is there anyone you'd want totalk to?""No. "

"I thought maybe . . . it's because she talks—used to talk—like you, attimes . . . maybe if I sent Miss Dagny Taggart to tell you—"

"That one? Sure, she used to talk like me. She's my only failure. Ithought she was the kind who belonged on my side. But she double crossed me,to keep her railroad. She'd sell her soul for her railroad.

Send her in, if you want me to slap her face."

"No, no, no! You don't have to see her, if that's how you feel. I don'twant to waste more time on people who rub you the wrong way. . . .

Only . . . only if it's not Miss Taggart, I don't know whom to pick.

. . . If . . . if I could find somebody you'd be willing to consider or .

"I've changed my mind," said Gait. "There is somebody I'd like to speakto."

"Who?" cried Mr. Thompson eagerly."Dr. Robert Stadler."

Mr. Thompson emitted a long whistle and shook his head apprehensively."That one is no friend of yours," he said in a tone of honest warning."He's the one I want to see."

"Okay, if you wish. If you say so. Anything you wish. I'll have him heretomorrow morning."

That evening, dining with Wesley Mouch in his own suite, Mr. Thompsonglared angrily at a glass of tomato juice placed before him. "What?

No grapefruit juice?" he snapped; his doctor had prescribed grapefruitjuice as protection against an epidemic of colds.

"No grapefruit juice," said the waiter, with an odd kind of emphasis.

"Fact is," said Mouch bleakly, "that a gang of raiders attacked a train atthe Taggart Bridge on the Mississippi. They blew up the track and damaged thebridge. Nothing serious. It's being repaired—but all traffic is held up andthe trains from Arizona can't get through."

"That's ridiculous! Aren't there any other—?" Mr. Thompson stopped; heknew that there were no other railroad bridges across the Mississippi.

After a moment, he spoke up in a staccato voice. "Order army detachmentsto guard the bridge. Day and night. Tell them to pick their best men for it.If anything happened to that bridge—"

He did not finish; he sat hunched, staring down at the costly china platesand the delicate hors d'oeuvres before him. The absence of so prosaic acommodity as grapefruit juice had suddenly made real to him, for the firsttime, what it was that would happen to the city of New York if anythinghappened to the Taggart Bridge.

"Dagny," said Eddie Willers, that evening, "the bridge is not the onlyproblem." He snapped on her desk lamp which, in forced concentration on herwork, she had neglected to turn on at the approach of dusk.

"No transcontinental trains can leave San Francisco. One of the fightingfactions out there—I don't know which one—has seized our terminal and imposeda 'departure tax' on trains. Meaning that they're holding trains for ransom.Our terminal manager has quit. Nobody knows what to do there now."

"I can't leave New York," she answered stonily.

"I know," he said softly. "That's why it's 7 who'll go there to straightenthings out. At least, to find a man to put in charge."

"No! I don't want you to. It's too dangerous. And what for? It doesn'tmatter now. There's nothing to save."

"It's still Taggart Transcontinental. I'll stand by it, Dagny, whereveryou go, you'll always be able to build a railroad. I couldn't. I don't even

want to make a new start. Not any more. Not after what I've seen. You should.I can't. Let me do what I can."

"Eddie! Don't you want—" She stopped, knowing that it was useless.

"All right, Eddie. If you wish."

"I'm flying to California tonight. I've arranged for space on an armyplane. ... I know that you will quit as soon as ... as soon as you canleave New York. You might be gone by the time I return. When you're ready,just go. Don't worry about me. Don't wait to tell me. Go as fast as you can.I . . .I'll say good-bye to you, now."

She rose to her feet. They stood facing each other; in the dim half lightof the office, the picture of Nathaniel Taggart hung on the wall betweenthem. They were both seeing the years since- that distant day when they hadfirst learned to walk down the track of a railroad. He inclined his head andheld it lowered for a long moment.

She extended her hand. "Good-bye, Eddie."

He clasped her hand firmly, not looking down at his fingers; he waslooking at her face.

He started to go, but stopped, turned to her and asked, his voice low, butsteady, neither as plea nor as despair, but as a last gesture ofconscientious clarity to close a long ledger, "Dagny . . . did you know . . .

how I felt about you?"

"Yes," she said softly, realizing in this moment that she had known itwordlessly for years, "I knew it.""Good-bye, Dagny."

The faint rumble of an underground train went through the walls of thebuilding and swallowed the sound of the door closing after him.

It was snowing, next morning, and melting drops were like an icy, cuttingtouch on the temples of Dr. Robert Stadler, as he walked down the longcorridor of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, toward the door of the royal suite. Twohusky men walked by his sides; they were from the department of MoraleConditioning, but did not trouble to hide what method of conditioning theywould welcome a chance to employ, "Just remember Mr. Thompson's orders," oneof them told him contemptuously. "One wrong squawk out of you—and you'llregret it, brother."

It was not the snow on his temples—thought Dr. Stadler—it was a burningpressure, it had been there since that scene, last night, when he hadscreamed to Mr. Thompson that he could not see John Gait. He had screamed inblind terror, begging a circle of impassive faces not to make him do it,sobbing that he would do anything but that. The faces had not condescended toargue or even to threaten him; they had merely given him orders. He had spenta sleepless night, telling himself that he would not obey; but he was walkingtoward that door. The burning pressure on his temples and the faint, dizzyingnausea of unreality came from the fact that he could not recapture the senseof being Dr. Robert Stadler.

He noticed the metallic gleam of the bayonets held by the guards at thedoor, and the sound of a key being turned in a lock. He found himself walkingforward and heard the door being locked behind him.

Across the long room, he saw John Gait sitting on the window sill, a tall,slender figure in slacks and shirt, one leg slanting down to the floor, theother bent, his hands clasping his knee, his head of sun-streaked hair raisedagainst a spread of gray sky—and suddenly Dr. Stadler saw the figure of ayoung boy sitting on the porch-railing of his home, near the campus of thePatrick Henry University, with the sun on the chestnut hair of a head liftedagainst a spread of summer blue, and he heard the passionate intensity of hisown voice saying twenty-two years ago: "The only sacred value in the world,John, is the human mind, the inviolate human mind . . ." —and he cried to

that boy's figure, across the room and across the years: "I couldn't help it,John! I couldn't help it!"

He gripped the edge of a table between them, for support and as aprotective barrier, even though the figure on the window sill had not moved.

"I didn't bring you to this!" he cried. "I didn't mean to! I couldn't helpit! It's not what I intended! . . . John! I'm not to blame for it!

I'm not! I never had a chance against them! They own the world! They leftme no place in it! . . . What's reason to them? What's science?

You don't know how deadly they are! You don't understand them! They don'tthink! They're mindless animals moved by irrational feelings—by their greedy,grasping, blind, unaccountable feelings! They seize whatever they want,that's all they know: that they want it, regardless of cause, effect orlogic—they want it, the bloody, grubbing pigs! . . . The mind? Don't you knowhow futile it is, the mind, against those mindless hordes? Our weapons are sohelplessly, laughably childish: truth, knowledge, reason, values, rights!Force is all they know, force, fraud and plunder! . , , John! Don't look atme like that! What could I do against their fists? I had to live, didn't I?It wasn't for myself—it was for the future of science! I had to be leftalone, I had to be protected, I had to make terms with them—there's no way tolive except on their terms—there isn't!—do you hear me?—there isn't! . . .What did you want me to do? Spend my life begging for jobs? Begging myinferiors for funds and endowments? Did you want my work to depend on themercy of the ruffians who have a knack for making money? I had no time tocompete with them for money or markets or any of their miserable materialpursuit! Was that your idea of justice—that they should spend their money onliquor, yachts and women, while the priceless hours of my life were wastedfor lack of scientific equipment? Persuasion? How could I persuade them? Whatlanguage could I speak to men who don't think? . . . You don't know howlonely I was, how starved for some spark of intelligence! How lonely andtired and helpless! Why should a mind like mine have to bargain with ignorantfools?

They'd never contribute a penny to science! Why shouldn't they be forced?It wasn't you that I wanted to force! That gun was not aimed at theintellect! It wasn't aimed at men like you and me, only at mindlessmaterialists! . . . Why do you look at me that way? I had no choice!

There isn't any choice except to beat them at their own game! Oh yes, itis their game, they set the rules! What do we count, the few who can think?We can only hope to get by, unnoticed—and to trick them into serving ouraims! . . . Don't you know how noble a purpose it was—

my vision of the future of science? Human knowledge set free of materialbonds! An unlimited end unrestricted by means! I am not a traitor, John! I'mnot! I was serving the cause of the mind! What I saw ahead, what I wanted,what I felt, was not to be measured in their miserable dollars! I wanted alaboratory! I needed it! What do I care where it came from or how? I could doso much! I could reach such heights!

Don't you have any pity? I wanted it! . . . What if they had to be forced?Who are they to think, anyway? Why did you teach them to rebel? It would haveworked, if you hadn't withdrawn them! It would have worked, I tell you! Itwouldn't be—like this! . . . Don't accuse me! We can't be guilty . . . all ofus . . . for centuries. ... We can't be so totally wrong! . . .We're notto be damned! We had no choice! There is no other way to live on earth! . . .Why don't you answer me? What are you seeing? Are you thinking of that speechyou made? I don't want to think of it! It was only logic! One can't live bylogic! Do you hear me? . . . Don't look at me! You're asking the impossible!Men can't exist your way! You permit no moments of weakness, you don't allowfor human frailties or human feelings! What do you want of us? Rationalitytwenty-four hours a day, with no loophole, no rest, no escape? . . . Don't

look at me, God damn you! I'm not afraid of you any longer! Do you hear me? Iam not afraid! Who are you to blame me, you miserable failure? Here's whereyour road has brought you! Here you are, caught, helpless, under guard, to bekilled by those brutes at any moment—and you dare to accuse me of beingimpractical! Oh yes, you're going to be killed! You won't win! You can't beallowed to win! You are the man who has to be destroyed!"

Dr, Stadler's gasp was a muffled scream, as if the immobility of thefigure on the window sill had served as a silent reflector and had suddenlymade him see the full meaning of his own words.

"No!" moaned Dr. Stadler, moving his head from side to side, to escape theunmoving green eyes. "No! . . .No! . . .No!"

Gait's voice had the same unbending austerity as his eyes: "You have saideverything I wanted to say to you."

Dr. Stadler banged his fists against the door; when it was opened, he ranout of the room.

-k -k -k

For three days, no one entered Gait's suite except the guards who broughthis meals. Early on the evening of the fourth day, the door opened to admitChick Morrison with two companions. Chick Morrison was dressed in dinnerclothes, and his smile was nervous, but a shade more confident than usual.One of his companions was a valet. The other was a muscular man whose faceseemed to clash with his tuxedo: it was a stony face with sleepy eyelids,pale, darting eyes and a prizefighter's broken nose; his skull was shavedexcept for a patch of faded blond curls on top; he kept his right hand in thepocket of his trousers.

"You will please dress, Mr. Gait," said Chick Morrison persuasively,pointing to the door of the bedroom, where a closet had been filled withexpensive garments which Gait had not chosen to wear. "You will please put onyour dinner clothes." He added, "This is an order, Mr.

Gait."

Gait walked silently into the bedroom. The three men followed. ChickMorrison sat on the edge of a chair, starting and discarding one cigaretteafter another. The valet went through too many too courteous motions, helpingGait to dress, handing him his shirt studs, holding his coat. The muscularman stood in a corner, his hand in his pocket. No one said a word.

"You will please co-operate, Mr. Gait," said Chick Morrison, when Gait wasready, and indicated the door with a courtly gesture of invitation toproceed.

So swiftly that no one could catch the motion of his hand, the muscularman was holding Gait's arm and pressing an invisible gun against his ribs."Don't make any false moves," he said in an expressionless voice.

"I never do," said Gait.

Chick Morrison opened the door. The valet stayed behind. The three figuresin dinner clothes walked silently down the hall to the elevator.

They remained silent in the elevator, the clicks of the flashing numbersabove the door marking their downward progress.

The elevator stopped on the mezzanine floor. Two armed soldiers precededthem and two others followed, as they walked through the long, dim corridors.The corridors were deserted except for armed sentinels posted at the turns.The muscular man's right arm was linked to Gait's left; the gun remainedinvisible to any possible observer. Gait felt the small pressure of themuzzle against his side; the pressure was expertly maintained: not to be feltas an impediment and not to be forgotten for a moment.

The corridor led to a wide, closed doorway. The soldiers seemed to meltaway into the shadows, when Chick Morrison's hand touched the doorknob. It

was his hand that opened the door, but the sudden contrast of light and soundmade it seem as if the door were flung open by an explosion: the light camefrom three hundred bulbs in the blazing chandeliers of the grand ballroom ofthe Wayne-Falkland Hotel; the sound was the applause of five hundred people.

Chick Morrison led the way to the speakers' table raised on a platformabove the tables filling the room. The people seemed to know, withoutannouncement, that of the two figures following him, it was the tall, slenderman with the gold-copper hair that they were applauding. His face had thesame quality as the voice they had heard on the radio : calm, confident—andout of reach.

The seat reserved for Gait was the place of honor in the center of thelong table, with Mr. Thompson waiting for him at his right and the muscularman slipping skillfully into the seat at his left, not relinquishing his armor the pressure of the muzzle. The jewels on the naked shoulders of womencarried the glitter of the chandeliers to the shadows of the tables crowdedagainst the distant walls; the severe black-and white of the men's figuresrescued the room's style of solemnly regal luxury from the discordant slashesmade by news cameras, microphones and a dormant array of televisionequipment. The crowd was on its feet, applauding. Mr. Thompson was smilingand watching Gait's face, with the eager, anxious look of an adult waitingfor a child's reaction to a spectacularly generous gift. Gait sat facing theovation, neither ignoring it nor responding.

"The applause you are hearing," a radio announcer was yelling into amicrophone in a corner of the room, "is in greeting to John Gait, who hasjust taken his place at the speakers' table! Yes, my friends, John Gait inperson—as those of you who can find a television set will have a chance tosee for yourself in a short while!"

I must remember where I am—thought Dagny, clenching her fists under thetablecloth, in the obscurity of a side table. It was hard to maintain a senseof double reality in the presence of Gait, thirty feet away from her. Shefelt that no danger or pain could exist in the world so long as she could seehis face—and, simultaneously, an icy terror, when she looked at those whoheld him in their power, when she remembered the blind irrationality of theevent they were staging. She fought to keep her facial muscles rigid, not tobetray herself by a smile of happiness or by a scream of panic.

She wondered how his eyes had been able to find her in that crowd.

She had seen the brief pause of his glance, which no one else couldnotice; the glance had been more than a kiss, it had been a handshake ofapproval and support.

He did not glance again in her direction. She could not force herself tolook away. It was startling to see him in evening clothes and more startlingstill that he wore them so naturally; he made them look like a work uniformof honor; his figure suggested the kind of banquet, in the days of a distantpast, where he would have been receiving an industrial award. Celebrations-she remembered her own words, with a stab of longing—should be only for thosewho have something to celebrate.

She turned away. She struggled not to look at him too often, not toattract the attention of her companions. She had been placed at a tableprominent enough to display her to the assembly, but obscure enough to keepher out of the line of Gait's sight, along with those who had incurred Gait'sdisfavor: with Dr. Ferris and Eugene Lawson.

Her brother Jim, she noted, had been placed closer to the platform; shecould see his sullen face among the nervous figures of Tinky Holloway, FredKinnan, Dr. Simon Pritchett. The tortured faces strung out above thespeakers' table were not succeeding in their efforts to hide that they lookedlike men enduring an ordeal; the calm of Gait's face seemed radiant amongthem; she wondered who was prisoner here and who was master. Her glance moved

slowly down the line-up of his table: Mr. Thompson, Wesley Mouch, ChickMorrison, some generals, some members of the Legislature and, preposterously,Mr. Mowen chosen as a bribe to Gait, as a symbol of big business. She glancedabout the room, looking for the face of Dr. Stadler; he was not present.

The voices filling the room were like a fever chart, she thought; theykept darting too high and collapsing into patches of silence; the occasionalspurts of someone's laughter broke off, incompleted, and attracted theshuddering turn of the heads at the neighboring tables. The faces were drawnand twisted by the most obvious and least dignified form of tension: byforced smiles. These people—she thought—knew, not by means of their reason,but by means of their panic, that this banquet was the ultimate climax andthe naked essence of their world. They knew that neither their God nor theirguns could make this celebration mean what they were struggling to pretend itmeant.

She could not swallow the food that was placed before her; her throatseemed closed by a rigid convulsion. She noticed that the others at her tablewere also merely pretending to eat. Dr. Ferris was the only one whoseappetite seemed unaffected.

When she saw a slush of ice cream in a crystal bowl before her, shenoticed the sudden silence of the room and heard the screeching of thetelevision machinery being dragged forward for action. Now—she thought, witha sinking sense of expectation, and knew that the same question mark was onevery mind in the room. They were all staring at Gait. His face did not moveor change.

No one had to call for silence, when Mr. Thompson waved to an announcer:the room did not seem to breathe.

"Fellow citizens," the announcer cried into a microphone, "of this countryand of any other that's able to listen—from the grand ballroom of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel in New York City, we are bringing you the inauguration of theJohn Gait Plan!"

A rectangle of tensely bluish light appeared on the wall behind thespeakers' table—a television screen to project for the guests the imageswhich the country was now to see.

"The John Gait Plan for Peace, Prosperity and Profit!" cried theannouncer, while a shivering picture of the ballroom sprang into view on thescreen. "The dawn of a new age! The product of a harmonious collaborationbetween the humanitarian spirit of our leaders and the scientific genius ofJohn Gait! If your faith in the future has been undermined by vicious rumors,you may now see for yourself our happily united family of leadership! . . .Ladies and gentlemen"—as the television camera swooped down to the speakers'table, and the stupefied face of Mr. Mowen filled the screen—"Mr. HoraceBussby Mowen, the American Industrialist!" The camera moved to an agedcollection of facial muscles shaped in imitation of a smile. "General of theArray Whittington S. Thorpe!" The camera, like an eye at a police line-up,moved from face to scarred face—scarred by the ravages of fear, of evasion,of despair, of uncertainty, of self-loathing, of guilt. "Majority Leader ofthe National Legislature, Mr. Lucian Phelps! . . . Mr.

Wesley Mouch! . . . Mr. Thompson!" The camera paused on Mr.

Thompson; he gave a big grin to the nation, then turned and looked offscreen, to his left, with an air of triumphant expectancy. "Ladies andgentlemen," the announcer said solemnly, "John Gait!"

Good God!—thought Dagny—what are they doing? From the screen, the face ofJohn Gait was looking at the nation, the face without pain or fear or guilt,implacable by virtue of serenity, invulnerable by virtue of self-esteem. Thisface—she thought—among those others?

Whatever it is that they're planning, she thought, it's undone—nothingmore can or has to be said—there's the product of one code and of the other,there's the choice, and whoever is human will know it.

"Mr. Gait's personal secretary," said the announcer, while the camerablurred hastily past the next face and went on. "Mr. Clarence 'Chick'

Morrison . . . Admiral Homer Dawley . . . Mr.—"

She looked at the faces around her, wondering: Did they see the contrast?Did they know it? Did they see him? Did they want him to be real?

"This banquet," said Chick Morrison, who had taken over as master ofceremonies, "is in honor of the greatest figure of our time, the ablestproducer, the man of the 'know-how, ' the new leader of our economy-John Gait! If you have heard his extraordinary radio speech, you can "haveno doubt that he can make things work. Now he is here to tell you that hewill make them work for you. If you have been misled by those old-fashionedextremists who claimed that he would never join us, that no merger ispossible between his way of life and ours, that it's either one or the other-tonight's event will prove to you that anything can be reconciled andunited! "

Once they have seen him—thought Dagny—can they wish to look at anybodyelse? Once they know that he is possible, that this is what man can be, whatelse can they want to seek? Can they now feel any desire except to achieve intheir souls what he has achieved in his? Or are they going to be stopped bythe fact that the Mouches, the Morrisons, the Thompsons of the world had notchosen to achieve it? Are they going to regard the Mouches as the human andhim as the impossible?

The camera was roving over the ballroom, flashing to the screen and to thecountry the faces of the prominent guests, the faces of the tensely watchfulleaders and—once in a while—the face of John Gait. He looked as if hisperceptive eyes were studying the men outside this room, the men who wereseeing him across the country; one could not tell whether he was listening:no reaction altered the composure of his face.

"I am proud to pay tribute tonight," said the leader of the Legislature,the next speaker, "to the greatest economic organizer the world has everdiscovered, the most gifted administrator, the most brilliant planner—JohnGait, the man who will save us! I am here to thank him in the name of thepeople! "

This—thought Dagny, with a sickened amusement—was the spectacle of thesincerity of the dishonest. The most fraudulent part of the fraud was thatthey meant it. They were offering Gait the best that their view of existencecould offer, they were trying to tempt him with that which was their dream oflife's highest fulfillment: this spread of mindless adulation, the unrealityof this enormous pretense-approval without standards, tribute without content, honor without causes,admiration without reasons, love without a code of values.

"We have discarded all our petty differences," Wesley Mouch was now sayinginto the microphone, "all partisan opinions, all personal interests andselfish views—in order to serve under the selfless leadership of John Gait!"

Why are they listening?—thought Dagny. Don't they see the hallmark ofdeath in those faces, and the hallmark of life in his?

Which state do they wish to choose? Which state do they seek for mankind?. . . She looked at the faces in the ballroom. They were nervously blank;they showed nothing but the sagging weight of lethargy and the staleness of achronic fear. They were looking at Gait and at Mouch, as if unable toperceive any difference between them or to feel concern if a differenceexisted, their empty, uncritical, unvaluing stare declaring: "Who am I toknow?" She shuddered, remembering his sentence: "The man who declares, (Whoam I to know?' is declaring, 'Who am I to live?' " Did they care to live?—she

thought. They did not seem to care even for the effort of raising thatquestion. . . . She saw a few faces who seemed to care. They were looking atGait with a desperate plea, with a wistfully tragic admiration—and with handslying limply on the tables before them.

These were the men who saw what he was, who lived in frustrated longingfor his world—but tomorrow, if they saw him being murdered before them, theirhands would hang as limply and their eyes would look away, saying, "Who am Ito act?"

"Unity of action and purpose," said Mouch, "will bring us to a happierworld. . . ."

Mr. Thompson leaned toward Gait and whispered with an amiable smile,"You'll have to say a few words to the country, later on, after me. No, no,not a long speech, just a sentence or two, no more.

Just 'hello, folks' or something like that, so they'll recognize yourvoice." The faintly stressed pressure of the "secretary's" muzzle againstGait's side added a silent paragraph. Gait did not answer.

"The John Gait Plan, " Wesley Mouch was saying, "will reconcile allconflicts. It will protect the property of the rich and give a greater shareto the poor. It will cut down the burden of your taxes and provide you withmore government benefits. It will lower prices and raise wages. It will givemore freedom to the individual and strengthen the bonds of collectiveobligations. It will combine the efficiency of free enterprise with thegenerosity of a planned economy,"

Dagny observed some faces—it took her an effort fully to believe it—whowere looking at Gait with hatred. Jim was one of them, she noted. When theimage of Mouch held the screen, these faces were relaxed in boredcontentment, which was not pleasure, but the comfort of license, of knowingthat nothing was demanded of them and nothing was firm or certain. When thecamera flashed the image of Gait, their lips grew tight and their featureswere sharpened by a look of peculiar caution. She felt with sudden certaintythat they feared the precision of his face, the unyielding clarity of hisfeatures, the look of being an entity, a look of asserting existence. Theyhate him for being himself—she thought, feeling a touch of cold horror, asthe nature of their souls became real to her—they hate him for his capacityto live.

Do they want to live?—she thought in self-mockery. Through the stunnednumbness of her mind, she remembered the sound of his sentence: "The desirenot to be anything, is the desire not to be."

It was now Mr. Thompson who was yelling into the microphone in hisbriskest and folksiest manner: "And I say to you: kick them in the teeth, allthose doubters who're spreading disunity and fear! They told you that JohnGait would never join us, didn't they? Well, here he is, in person, of hisown free choice, at this table and at the head of our State! Ready, willingand able to serve the people's cause!

Don't you ever again, any of you, start doubting or running or giving up!Tomorrow is here today—and what a tomorrow! With three meals a day foreveryone on earth, with a car in every garage, and with electric power givenfree, produced by some sort of a motor the like of which we've never seen!And all you have to do is just be patient a little while longer! Patience,faith and unity—that's the recipe, for progress! We must stand united amongourselves and united with the rest of the world, as a great big happy family,all working for the good of all! We have found a leader who will beat therecord of our richest and busiest past! It's his love for mankind that hasmade him come here—to serve you, protect you and take care of you! He hasheard your pleas and has answered the call of our common human duty! Everyman is his brother's keeper! No man is an island unto himself! And now youwill hear his voice—now you will hear his own message! . . . 'Ladies and

gentlemen," he said solemnly, "John Gait—to the collective family ofmankind!"

The camera moved to Gait. He remained still for a moment. Then, with soswift and expert a movement that his secretary's hand was unable to match it,he rose to his feet, leaning sidewise, leaving the pointed gun momentarilyexposed to the sight of the world—then, standing straight, facing thecameras, looking at all his invisible viewers, he said: "Get the hell out ofmy way!"

CHAPTER IXTHE GENERATOR

"Get the hell out of my way!"

Dr. Robert Stadler heard it on the radio in his car. He did not knowwhether the next sound, part-gasp, part-scream, part-laughter, started risingfrom him or from the radio—but he heard the click that cut them both off. Theradio went dead. No further sounds came from the Wayne-Falkland Hotel.

He jerked his hand from knob to knob under the lighted dial. Nothing camethrough, no explanations, no pleas of technical trouble, no silence-hidingmusic. All stations were off the air.

He shuddered, he gripped the wheel, leaning forward across it, like ajockey at the close of a race, and his foot pressed down on the accelerator.The small stretch of highway before him bounced with the leaping of hisheadlights. There was nothing beyond the lighted strip but the emptiness ofthe prairies of Iowa.

He did not know why he had been listening to the broadcast; he did notknow what made him tremble now. He chuckled abruptly—it sounded like amalevolent growl—either at the radio, or at those in the city, or at the sky.

He was watching the rare posts of highway numbers. He did not need toconsult a map: for four days, that map had been printed on his brain, like anet of lines traced in acid. They could not take it away from him, hethought; they could not stop him. He felt as if he were being pursued; butthere was nothing for miles behind him, except the two red lights on the rearof his car—like two small signals of danger, fleeing through the darkness ofthe Iowa plains.

The motive directing his hands and feet was four days behind him. It wasthe face of the man on the window sill, and the faces he had confronted whenhe had escaped from that room. He had cried to them that he could not dealwith Gait and neither could they, that Gait would destroy them all, unlessthey destroyed him first. "Don't get smart, Professor," Mr. Thompson hadanswered coldly. "You've done an awful lot of yelling about hating his guts,but when it comes to action, you haven't helped us at all. I don't know whichside you're on. If he doesn't give in to us peaceably, we might have toresort to pressure-such as hostages whom he wouldn't want to see hurt—and you're first on thelist, Professor." "I?" he had screamed, shaking with terror and with bitterlydesperate laughter. "I? But he damns me more than anyone on earth!" "How do Iknow?" Mr. Thompson had answered. "I hear that you used to be his teacher.Arid, don't forget, you're the only one he asked for."

His mind liquid with terror, he had felt as if he were about to be crushedbetween two walls advancing upon him: he had no chance, if Gait refused tosurrender—and less chance, if Gait joined these men.

It was then that a distant shape had come swimming forward in his mind:the image of a mushroom-domed structure in the middle of an Iowa plain.

All images had begun to fuse in his mind thereafter. Project X—he hadthought, not knowing whether it was the vision of that structure or of afeudal castle commanding the countryside, that gave him the sense of an ageand a world to which he belonged. . . .I'm Robert Stadler —he had thought-it's my property, it came from my discoveries, they said it was I whoinvented it. . . . I'll show them!—he had thought, not knowing whether hemeant the man on the window sill or the others or the whole of mankind. . . .His thoughts had become like chips floating in a liquid, without connections:To seize control . . .

I'll show them! ... To seize control, to rule . . . There is no otherway to live on earth. . . .

These had been the only words that named the plan in his mind. He had feltthat the rest was clear to him—clear in the form of a savage emotion cryingdefiantly that he did not have to make it clear. He would seize control ofProject X and he would rule a part of the country as his private feudaldomain. The means? His emotion had answered: Somehow. The motive? His mindhad repeated insistently that his motive was terror of Mr. Thompson's gang,that he was not safe among them any longer, that his plan was a practicalnecessity. In the depth of his liquid brain, his emotion had held anotherkind of terror, drowned along with the connections between his broken chipsof words.

These chips had been the only compass directing his course through fourdays and nights—while he drove down deserted highways, across a countrycollapsing into chaos, while he developed a monomaniac's cunning forobtaining illegal purchases of gas, while he snatched random hours ofrestless sleep, in obscure motels, under assumed names. . . .

I'm Robert Stadler—he had thought, his mind repeating it as a formula ofomnipotence. ... To seize control—he had thought, speeding against thefutile traffic lights of half-abandoned towns—speeding on the vibrating steelof the Taggart Bridge across the Mississippi-speeding past the occasional ruins of farms in the empty stretches ofIowa. . . . I'll show them—he had thought—let them pursue, they won't stop methis time. ... He had thought it, even though no one had pursued him—as noone was pursuing him now, but the taillights of his own car and the motivedrowned in his mind.

He looked at his silent radio and chuckled; the chuckle had the emotionalquality of a fist being shaken at space. It's I who am practical-he thought—I have no choice ... I have no other way . . . I'll show allthose insolent gangsters, who forget that I am Robert Stadler . . . They willall collapse, but I won't! . . . I'll survive! . . . I'll win! . . . I'llshow them!

The words were like chunks of solid ground in his mind, in the midst of afiercely silent swamp; the connections lay submerged at the bottom.

If connected, his words would have formed the sentence: I'll show him thatthere is no other way to live on earth! . . .

The scattered lights in the distance ahead were the barracks erected onthe site of Project X, now known as Harmony City. He observed, as he camecloser, that something out of the ordinary was going on at Project X, Thebarbed-wire fence was broken, and no sentinels met him at the gate. But somesort of abnormal activity was churning in the patches of darkness and in theglare of some wavering spotlights: there were armored trucks and runningfigures and shouted orders and the gleam of bayonets. No one stopped his car.At the corner of a shanty, he saw the motionless body of a soldier sprawledon the ground.

Drunk—he thought, preferring to think it, wondering why he felt unsure of

it.

The mushroom structure crouched on a knoll before him; there were lightsin the narrow slits of its windows—and the shapeless funnels protruded fromunder its dome, aimed at the darkness of the country. A soldier barred hisway, when he alighted from his car at the entrance.

The soldier was properly armed, but hatless, and his uniform seemed toosloppy. "Where are you going, bud?" he asked.

"Let me in!" Dr. Stadler ordered contemptuously.

"What's your business here?"

"I'm Dr. Robert Stadler."

"I'm Joe Blow. I said, What's your business? Are you one of the new or oneof the old?"

"Let me in, you idiot! I'm Dr. Robert Stadler!"

It was not the name, but the tone of voice and the form of address thatseemed to convince the soldier. "One of the new," he said and, opening thedoor, shouted to somebody inside, "Hey, Mac, take care of Grandpaw here, seewhat he wants!"

In the bare, dim hall of reinforced concrete, he was met by a man whomight have been an officer, except that his tunic was open at the throat anda cigarette hung insolently in the corner of his mouth.

"Who are you?" he snapped, his hand jerking too swiftly to the holster onhis hip.

"I'm Dr. Robert Stadler."

The name had no effect. "Who gave you permission to come here?""I need no permission."

This seemed to have an effect; the man removed the cigarette from hismouth. "Who sent for you?" he asked, a shade uncertainly.

"Will you please let me speak to the commandant?" Dr. Stadler demandedimpatiently.

"The commandant? You're too late, brother."

"The chief engineer, then!"

"The chief-who? Oh, Willie? Willie's okay, he's one of us, but he's out onan errand just now."

There were other figures in the hall, listening with an apprehensivecuriosity. The officer's hand summoned one of them to approach—an unshavedcivilian with a shabby overcoat thrown over his shoulders.

"What do you want?" he snapped at Stadler, "Would someone please tell mewhere are the gentlemen of the scientific staff?" Dr. Stadler asked in thecourteously peremptory tone of an order.

The two men glanced at each other, as if such a question were irrelevantin this place. "Do you come from Washington?" the civilian askedsuspiciously.

"I do not. I will have you understand that I'm through with thatWashington gang."

"Oh?" The man seemed pleased. "Are you a Friend of the People, then?"

"I would say that I'm the best friend the people ever had. I'm the man whogave them all this." He pointed around him.

"You did?" said the man, impressed. "Are you one of those who made a dealwith the Boss?"

"I'm the boss here, from now on,"

The men looked at each other, retreating a few steps. The officer asked,"Did you say the name was Stadler?"

"Robert Stadler, And if you don't know what that means, you'll find out!"

"Will you please follow me, sir?" said the officer, with shaky politeness.

What happened next was not clear to Dr. Stadler, because his mind refusedto admit the reality of the things he was seeing. There were shifting figuresin half-lighted, disordered offices, there were too many firearms oneverybody's hips, there were senseless questions asked of him by jerky voicesthat alternated between impertinence and fear.

He did not know whether any of them tried to give him an explanation; hewould not listen; he could not permit this to be true. He kept stating in thetone of a feudal sovereign, "I'm the boss here, from now on ... I give theorders ... I came to take over ... I own this place.

. . . I am Dr. Robert Stadler—and if you don't know that name in thisplace, you have no business being here, you infernal idiots! You'll blowyourselves to pieces, if that's the' state of your knowledge! Have you had ahigh-school course in physics? You don't look to me as if you've ever beenallowed inside a high school, any of you! What are you doing here? Who areyou?"

It took him a long time to grasp—when his mind could not block it anylonger—that somebody had beaten him to his plan: somebody had held the sameview of existence as his own and had set out to achieve the same future. Hegrasped that these men, who called themselves the Friends of the People, hadseized possession of Project X, tonight, a few hours ago, intending toestablish a reign of their own. He laughed in their faces, with bitterlyincredulous contempt, "You don't know what you're doing, you miserablejuvenile delinquents! Do you think that you—you!—can handle a high-precisioninstrument of science? Who is your leader? I demand to see your leader!"

It was his tone of overbearing authority, his contempt and their ownpanic—the blind panic of men of unbridled violence, who have no standards ofsafety or danger—that made them waver and wonder whether he was, perhaps,some secret top-level member of their leadership; they were equally ready todefy or to obey any authority. After being shunted from one jittery commanderto another, he found himself at last being led down iron stairways and downlong, echoing, underground corridors of reinforced concrete to an audiencewith "The Boss" in person, The Boss had taken refuge in the undergroundcontrol room.

Among the complex spirals of the delicate scientific machinery thatproduced the sound ray, against the wall panel of glittering levers, dialsand gauges, known as the Xylophone, Robert Stadler faced the new ruler ofProject X. It was Cuffy Meigs.

He wore a tight, semi-military tunic and leather leggings; the flesh ofhis neck bulged over the edge of his collar; his black curls were matted withsweat. He was pacing restlessly, unsteadily in front of the Xylophone,shouting orders to men who kept rushing in and out of the room: "Sendcouriers to every county seat within our reach! Tell 'em that the Friends ofthe People have won! Tell 'em they're not to take orders from Washington anylonger! The new capital of the People's Commonwealth is Harmony City,henceforth to be known as Meigsville! Tell 'em that I'll expect five hundredthousand dollars per every five thousand heads of population, by tomorrowmorning—or else!"

It took some time before Cuffy Meigs' attention and bleary brown eyescould be drawn to focus on the person of Dr. Stadler. "Well, what is it? Whatis it?" he snapped.

"I am Dr. Robert Stadler."

"Huh?— Oh, yeah! Yeah! You're the big guy from outer spaces, aren't you?You're the fellow who catches atoms or something. Well, what on earth are youdoing here?"

"It is I who should ask you that question."

"Huh? Look, Professor, I'm in no mood for jokes."

"I have come here to take control."

"Control? Of what?"

"Of this equipment. Of this place. Of the countryside within its radius ofoperation."

Meigs stared at him blankly for a moment, then asked softly, "How did youget here?""By car."

"I mean, whom did you bring with you?""Nobody."

"What weapons did you bring?""None. My name is sufficient."

"You came here alone, with your name and your car?""I did."

Cuffy Meigs burst out laughing in his face.

"Do you think," asked Dr. Stadler, "that you can operate an installationof this kind?"

"Run along, Professor, run along! Beat it, before I have you shot!We've got no use for intellectuals around here!"

"How much do you know about this?" Dr. Stadler pointed at the Xylophone.

"Who cares? Technicians are a dime a dozen these days! Beat it!

This ain't Washington! I'm through with those impractical dreamers inWashington! They won't get anywhere, bargaining with that radio ghost andmaking speeches! Action—that's what's needed! Direct action!

Beat it, Doc! Your day is over!" He was weaving unsteadily back and forth,catching at a lever of the Xylophone once in a while. Dr. Stadler realizedthat Meigs was drunk.

"Don't touch those levers, you fool!"

Meigs jerked his hand back involuntarily, then waved it defiantly at thepanel. "I'll touch anything I please! Don't you tell-me what to do!"

"Get away from that panel! Get out of here! This is mine! Do youunderstand? It's my property!"

"Property? Huh!" Meigs gave a brief bark that was a chuckle.

"I invented it! I created it! I made it possible!"

"You did? Well, many thanks, Doc. Many thanks, but we don't need you anylonger. We've got our own mechanics."

"Have you any idea what I had to know in order to make it possible?You couldn't think of a single tube of it! Not a single bolt!"Meigs shrugged. "Maybe not."

"Then how dare you think that you can own it? How dare you come here? Whatclaim do you have to it?"

Meigs patted his holster. "This."

"Listen, you drunken lout!" cried Dr. Stadler. "Do you know what you'replaying with?"

"Don't you talk to me like that, you old fool! Who are you to talk to melike that? I can break your neck with my bare hands! Don't you know who Iam?"

"You're a scared thug way out of his depth!"

"Oh, I am, am I? I'm the Boss! I'm the Boss and I'm not going to bestopped by an old scarecrow like you! Get out of here!"

They stood staring at each other for a moment, by the panel of theXylophone, both cornered by terror. The unadmitted root of Dr. Stadler'sterror was his frantic struggle not to acknowledge that he was looking at hisfinal product, that this was his spiritual son. Cuffy Meigs'

terror had wider roots, it embraced all of existence; he had lived inchronic terror all his life, but now he was struggling not to acknowledgewhat it was that he had dreaded: in the moment of his triumph, when heexpected to be safe, that mysterious, occult breed—the intellectual —wasrefusing to fear him and defying his power.

"Get out of here!" snarled Cuffy Meigs. "I'll call my men! I'll have youshot! "

"Get out of here, you lousy, brainless, swaggering moron!" snarled Dr.Stadler. "Do you think I'll let you cash in on my life? Do you think it's foryou that I . . . that I sold—" He did not finish. "Stop touching thoselevers, God damn you!"

"Don't you give me orders! I don't need you to tell me what to do!

You're not going to scare me with your classy mumbo-jumbo! I'll do as Iplease! What did I fight for, if I can't do as I please?" He chuckled andreached for a lever.

"Hey, Cuffy, take it easy!" yelled some figure in the back of the room,darting forward.

"Stand back!" roared Cuffy Meigs. "Stand back, all of you! Scared, am I?I'll show you who's boss!"

Dr. Stadler leaped to stop him—but Meigs shoved him aside with one arm,gave a gulp of laughter at the sight of Stadler falling to the floor, and,with the other arm, yanked a lever of the Xylophone.

The crash of sound—the screeching crash of ripped metal and of pressurescolliding on conflicting circuits, the sound of a monster turn' ing uponitself—was heard only inside the structure. No sound was heard outside.Outside, the structure merely rose into the air, suddenly and silently,cracked open into a 'few large pieces, shot some hissing streaks of bluelight to the sky and came down as a pile of rubble. Within the circle of aradius of a hundred miles, enclosing parts of four states, telegraph polesfell like matchsticks, farmhouses collapsed into chips, city buildings wentdown as if slashed and minced by a single second's blow, with no time for asound to be heard by the twisted bodies of the victims—and, on the circle'speriphery, halfway across the Mississippi, the engine and the first six carsof a passenger train flew as a shower of metal into the water of the river,along with the western spans of the Taggart Bridge, cut in half.

On the site of what had once been Project X, nothing remained alive amongthe ruins—except, for some endless minutes longer, a huddle of torn flesh andscreaming pain that had once been a great mind.

There was a sense of weightless freedom—thought Dagny—in the feeling thata telephone booth was her only immediate, absolute goal, with no concern forany of the goals of the passers-by in the streets around her. It did not makeher feel estranged from the city: it made her feel, for the first time, thatshe owned the city and that she loved it, that she had never loved it beforeas she did in this moment, with so personal, solemn and confident a sense ofpossession. The night was still and clear; she looked at the sky; as herfeeling was more solemn than joyous, but held the sense of a future joy—sothe air was more windless than warm, but held the hint of a distant spring.

Get the hell out of my way—she thought, not with resentment, but almostwith amusement, with a sense of detachment and deliverance, addressing it tothe passers-by, to the traffic when it impeded her hurried progress, and toany fear she had known in the past. It was less than an hour ago that she hadheard him utter that sentence, and his voice still seemed to ring in the airof the streets, merging into a distant hint of laughter.

She had laughed exultantly, in the ballroom of the Wayne-Falkland, whenshe had heard him say it; she had laughed, her hand pressed to her mouth, sothat the laughter was only in her eyes—and in his, when he had lookedstraight at her and she had known that he heard it. They had looked at eachother for the span of a second, above the heads of the gasping, screamingcrowd—above the crash of the microphones being shattered, though all stationshad been instantly cut off—above the bursts of breaking glass on fallingtables, as some people went stampeding to the doors.

Then she had heard Mr. Thompson cry, waving his arm at Gait, "Take himback to his room, but guard him with your lives!"—and the crowd had parted asthree men led him out. Mr. Thompson seemed to collapse for a moment, droppinghis forehead on his arm, but he rallied, jumped to his feet, waved vaguely athis henchmen to follow and rushed out, through a private side exit. No oneaddressed or instructed the guests: some were running blindly to escape,others sat still, not daring to move. The ballroom was like a ship withoutcaptain. She cut through the crowd and followed the clique. No one tried tostop her.

She found them huddled in a small, private study: Mr. Thompson was slumpedin an armchair, clutching his head with both hands, Wesley Mouch was moaning,Eugene Lawson was sobbing with the sound of a nasty child's rage, Jim waswatching the others with an oddly expectant intensity. "I told you so!" Dr.Ferris was shouting. "I told you so, didn't I? That's where you get with your'peaceful persuasion'!"

She remained standing by the door. They seemed to notice her presence, butthey did not seem to care.

"I resign!" yelled Chick Morrison. "I resign! I'm through! I don't knowwhat to say to the country! I can't think! I won't try! It's no use!

I couldn't help it! You're not going to blame me! I've resigned!" He wavedhis arms in some shapeless gesture of futility or farewell, and ran out ofthe room, "He has a hide-out all stocked for himself in Tennessee," saidTinky Holloway reflectively, as if he, too, had taken a similar precautionand were now wondering whether the time had come.

"He won't keep it for long, if he gets there at all," said Mouch. "Withthe gangs of raiders and the state of transportation—" He spread his handsand did not finish.

She knew what thoughts were filling the pause; she knew that no matterwhat private escapes these men had once provided for themselves, they werenow grasping the fact that all of them were trapped.

She observed that there was no terror in their faces; she saw hints of it,but it looked like a perfunctory terror. Their expressions ranged from blankapathy to the relieved look of cheats who had believed that the game couldend no other way and were making no effort to contest it or regret it—to thepetulant blindness of Lawson, who refused to be conscious of anything—to thepeculiar intensity of Jim, whose face suggested a secret smile.

"Well? Well?" Dr. Ferris was asking impatiently, with the crackling energyof a man who feels at home in a world of hysteria. "What are you now going todo with him? Argue? Debate? Make speeches?"

No one answered.

"He . . . has . . . to . . . save . . . us," said Mouch slowly, as ifstraining the last of his mind into blankness and delivering an ultimatum toreality. "He has to . . . take over . . . and save the system."

"Why don't you write him a love letter about it?" said Ferris.

"We've got to . . . make him . . . take over . . .We've got to force himto rule," said Mouch in the tone of a sleepwalker.

"Now, " said Ferris, suddenly dropping his voice, "do you see what avaluable establishment the State Science Institute really is?"

Mouch did not answer him, but she observed that they all seemed to knowwhat he meant.

"You objected to that private research project of mine as 'impractical,' "said Ferris softly. "But what did I tell you?"

Mouch did not answer; he was cracking his knuckles.

"This is no time for squeamishness," James Taggart spoke up withunexpected vigor, but his voice, too, was oddly low. "We don't have to besissies about it."

"It seems to me . . ." said Mouch dully, "that . . . that the endjustifies the means . . ."

"It's too late for any scruples or any principles," said Ferris. "Onlydirect action can work now."

No one answered; they were acting as if they wished that their pauses, nottheir words, would state what they were discussing.

"It won't work," said Tinky Holloway, "He won't give in."

"That's what you think!" said Ferris, and chuckled, "You haven't seen ourexperimental model in action. Last month, we got three confessions in threeunsolved murder cases."

"If . . ." started Mr. Thompson, and his voice cracked suddenly into amoan, "if he dies, we all perish!"

"Don't worry," said Ferris. "He won't. The Ferris Persuader is safelycalculated against that possibility."

Mr. Thompson did not answer.

"It seems to me . . . that we have no other choice . . ." said Mouch; itwas almost a whisper.

They remained silent; Mr. Thompson was struggling not to see that theywere all looking at him. Then he cried suddenly, "Oh, do anything you want! Icouldn't help it! Do anything you want!"

Dr. Ferris turned to Lawson. "Gene," he said tensely, still whispering,"run to the radio-control office. Order all stations to stand by. Tell themthat I'll have Mr. Gait on the air within three hours."

Lawson leaped to his feet, with a sudden, mirthful grin, and ran out ofthe room.

She knew. She knew what they intended doing and what it was within themthat made it possible. They did not think that this would succeed. They didnot think that Gait would give in; they did not want him to give in. They didnot think that anything could save them now; they did not want to be saved.Moved by the panic of their nameless emotions, they had fought againstreality all their lives—and now they had reached a moment when at last theyfelt at home. They did not have to know why they felt it, they who had chosennever to know what they felt—they merely experienced a sense of recognition,since this was what they had been seeking, this was die kind of reality thathad been implied in all of their feelings, their actions, their d3sires,their choices, their dreams. This was the nature and the method of therebellion against existence and of the undefined quest for an unnamedNirvana. They did not want to live; they wanted him to die.

The horror she felt was only a brief stab, like the wrench of a switchingperspective: she grasped that the objects she had thought to be human werenot. She was left with a sense of clarity, of a final answer and of the needto act. He was in danger; there was no time and no room in her consciousnessto waste emotion on the actions of the subhuman.

"We must make sure," Wesley Mouch was whispering, "that nobody -everlearns about it . . ."

"Nobody will," said Ferris; their voices had the cautious drone ofconspirators. "It's a secret, separate unit on the Institute grounds . . .

Sound-proofed and safely distant from the rest . . . Only a very few ofour staff have ever entered it. . . ."

"If we were to fly—" said Mouch, and stopped abruptly, as if he had caughtsome warning in Ferris' face.

She saw Ferris' eyes move to her, as if he had suddenly remembered herpresence. She held his glance, letting him see the untroubled indifference ofhers, as if she had neither cared nor understood. Then, as if merely graspingthe signal of a private discussion, she turned slowly, with the suggestion ofa shrug, and left the room. She knew that they were now past the stage ofworrying about her.

She walked with the same unhurried indifference through the halls andthrough the exit of the hotel. But a block away, when she had turned acorner, her head flew up and the folds of her evening gown slammed like asail against her legs with the sudden violence of the speed of her steps.

And now, as she rushed through the darkness, thinking only of finding atelephone booth, she felt a new sensation rising irresistibly within her,past the immediate tension of danger and concern: it was the sense of freedomof a world that had never had to be obstructed.

She saw the wedge of light on the sidewalk, that came from the window of abar. No one gave her a second glance, as she crossed the half deserted room:the few customers were still waiting and whispering tensely in front of thecrackling blue void of an empty television screen.

Standing in the tight space of the telephone booth, as in the cabin of aship about to take off for a different planet, she dialed the number OR 6-5693.

The voice that answered at once was Francisco's. "Hello?""Francisco?"

"Hello, Dagny. I was expecting you to call.""Did you hear the broadcast?""I did."

"They are now planning to force him to give in." She kept her voice to thetone of a factual report. "They intend to torture him. They have some machinecalled the Ferris Persuader, in an isolated unit on the grounds of the StateScience Institute. It's in New Hampshire. They mentioned flying. Theymentioned that they would have him on the radio within three hours."

"I see. Are you calling from a public phone booth?"

"Yes."

"You're still in evening clothes, aren't you?""Yes."

"Now listen carefully. Go home, change your clothes, pack a few thingsyou'll need, take your jewelry and any valuables that you can carry, takesome warm clothing. We won't have time to do it later.

Meet me in forty minutes, on the northwest corner, two blocks east of themain entrance of the Taggart Terminal,"

"Right."

"So long, Slug.""So long, Frisco."

She was in the bedroom of her apartment, in less than five minutes,tearing off her evening gown. She left it lying in the middle of the floor,like the discarded uniform of an army she was not serving any longer. She puton a dark blue suit and—remembering Gait's words—a white, high-collaredsweater. She packed a suitcase and a bag with a strap that she could carryswung over her shoulder. She put her jewelry in a corner of the bag,including the bracelet of Rearden Metal she had earned in the outside world,and the five-dollar gold piece she had earned in the valley.

It was easy to leave the apartment and to lock the door, even though sheknew she would probably never open it again. It seemed harder, for a moment,when she came to her office. No one had seen her come in; the anteroom of heroffice was empty; the great Taggart Building seemed unusually quiet. Shestood looking for a moment at this room and at all the years it hadcontained. Then she smiled—no, it was not too hard, she thought; she openedher safe and took the documents she had come here to get. There was nothingelse that she wanted to take from her office—except the picture of NathanielTaggart and the map of Taggart Transcontinental. She broke the two frames,folded the picture and the map, and slipped them into her suitcase.

She was locking the suitcase, when she heard the sound of hurrying steps.The door flew open and the chief engineer rushed in; he was shaking; his facewas distorted.

"Miss Taggart!" he cried. "Oh, thank God, Miss Taggart, you're here! We'vebeen calling for you all over!"

She did not answer; she looked at him inquiringly.

"Miss Taggart, have you heard?"

"What?"

"Then you haven't! Oh God, Miss Taggart, it's . . .1 can't believe it, Istill can't believe it, but ... Oh God, what are we going to do?The . . . the Taggart Bridge is gone!"She stared at him, unable to move.

"It's gone! Blown up! Blown up, apparently, in one second! Nobody -knowsfor certain what happened—but it looks like . . . they think that somethingwent wrong at Project X and ... it looks like those sound rays, MissTaggart! We can't get through to any point within a radius of a hundredmiles! It's not possible, it can't be possible, but it looks as if everything

in that circle has been wiped out! . . . We can't get any answers! Nobody canget an answer—the newspapers, the radio stations, the police! We're stillchecking, but the stories that are coming from the rim of that circle are—"He shuddered. "Only one thing is certain: the bridge is gone! Miss Taggart!We don't know what to do!"

She leaped to her desk and seized the telephone receiver. Her hand stoppedin mid-air. Then, slowly, twistedly, with the greatest effort ever demandedof her, she began to move her arm down to place the receiver back. It seemedto her that it took a long time, as if her arm had to move against someatmospheric pressure that no human body could combat—and in the span of thesefew brief moments, in the stillness of a blinding pain, she knew whatFrancisco had felt, that night, twelve years ago—and what a boy of twenty-sixhad felt when he had looked at his motor for the last time.

"Miss Taggart!" cried the chief engineer. "We don't know what to do!"

The receiver clicked softly back into its cradle. "I don't, either," sheanswered.

In a moment, she knew it was over. She heard her voice telling the man tocheck further and report to her later—and she waited for the sound of hissteps to vanish in the echoing silence of the hall.

Crossing the concourse of the Terminal for the last time, she glanced atthe statue of Nathaniel Taggart—and remembered a promise she had made. Itwould be only a symbol now, she thought, but it would be the kind of farewellthat Nathaniel Taggart deserved. She had no other writing instrument, so shetook the lipstick from her bag and, smiling up at the marble face of the manwho would have understood, she drew a large sign of the dollar on thepedestal under his feet.

She was first to reach the corner, two blocks east of the Terminalentrance. As she waited, she observed the first trickles of the panic thatwas soon to engulf the city: there were automobiles driving too fast, some ofthem loaded with household effects, there were too many police cars speedingby, and too many sirens bursting in the distance.

The news of the destruction of the Bridge was apparently spreading throughthe city; they would know that the city was doomed and they would start astampede to escape—but they had no place to go, and it was not her concernany longer.

She saw Francisco's figure approaching from some distance away; sherecognized the swiftness of his walk, before she could distinguish the faceunder the cap pulled low over his eyes. She caught the moment when he sawher, as he came closer. He waved his arm, with a smile of greeting. Someconscious stress in the sweep of his arm made it the gesture of a d'Anconia,welcoming the arrival of a long-awaited traveler at the gates of his owndomain.

When he approached, she stood solemnly straight and, looking at his faceand at the buildings of the greatest city in the world, as at the kind ofwitnesses she wanted, she said slowly, her voice confident and steady: "Iswear—by my life and my love of it—that I will never live for the sake ofanother man, nor ask another man to live for mine."

He inclined his head, as if in sign of admittance. His smile was now asalute.

Then he took her suitcase with one hand, her arm with the other, and said,"Come on."

The unit known as "Project F"—in honor of its originator, Dr. Ferns—was asmall structure of reinforced concrete, low on the slope of the hill thatsupported the State Science Institute on a higher, more public level. Onlythe small gray patch of the unit's roof could be seen from the Institute'swindows, hidden in a jungle of ancient trees; it looked no bigger than thecover of a manhole.

The unit consisted of two stories in the shape of a small cube placedasymmetrically on top of a larger one. The first story had no windows, only adoor studded with iron spikes; the second story had but one window, as if inreluctant concession to daylight, like a face with a single eye. The men onthe staff of the Institute felt no curiosity about that structure and avoidedthe paths that led down to its door; nobody had ever suggested it, but theyhad the impression that the structure housed a project devoted to experimentswith the germs of deadly diseases.

The two floors were occupied by laboratories that contained a great manycages with guinea pigs, dogs and rats. But the heart and meaning of thestructure was a room in its cellar, deep under the ground; the room had beenincompetently lined with the porous sheets of soundproofing material; thesheets had begun to crack and the naked rock of a cave showed through.

The unit was always protected by a squad of four special guards.

Tonight, the squad had been augmented to sixteen, summoned for emergencyduty by a long-distance telephone call from New York. The guards, as well asall other employees of "Project F," had been carefully chosen on the basis ofa single qualification: an unlimited capacity for obedience.

The sixteen were stationed for the night outside the structure and in thedeserted laboratories above the ground, where they remained uncritically onduty, with no curiosity about anything that might be taking place below.

In the cellar room, under the ground, Dr. Ferris, Wesley Mouch and JamesTaggart sat in armchairs lined up against one wall. A machine that lookedlike a small cabinet of irregular shape stood in a corner across from them.Its face bore rows of glass dials, each dial marked by a segment of red, asquare screen that looked like an amplifier, rows of numbers, rows of woodenknobs and plastic buttons, a single lever controlling a switch at one sideand a single red glass button at the other. The face of the machine seemed tohave more expression than the face of the mechanic in charge of it; he was ahusky young man in a sweat-stained shirt with sleeves rolled above theelbows; his pale blue eyes were glazed by an enormously conscientiousconcentration on his task; he moved his lips once in a while, as if recitinga memorized lesson.

A short wire led from the machine to an electric storage battery behindit. Long coils of wire, like the twisted arms of an octopus, stretchedforward across the stone floor, from the machine to a leather mattress spreadunder a cone of violent light. John Gait lay strapped to the mattress. He wasnaked; the small metal disks of electrodes at the ends of the wires wereattached to his wrists, his shoulders, his hips and his ankles; a deviceresembling a stethoscope was attached to his chest and connected to theamplifier.

"Get this straight," said Dr. Ferris, addressing him for the first time.

"We want you to take full power over the economy of the country. We wantyou to become a dictator. We want you to rule. Understand?

We want you to give orders and to figure out the right orders to give.

What we want, we mean to get Speeches, logic, arguments or passiveobedience won't save you now. We want ideas—or else. We won't let you out ofhere until you tell us the exact measures you'll take to save our system.Then we'll have you tell it to the country over the radio."

He raised his wrist, displaying a stop-watch. "I'll give you thirtyseconds to decide whether you want to start talking right now. If not, thenwe'll start. Do you understand?"

Gait was looking straight at them, his face expressionless, as if heunderstood too much. He did not answer.

They heard the sound of the stop-watch in the silence, counting off theseconds, and the sound of Mouch's choked, irregular breathing as he grippedthe arms of his chair.

Ferris waved a signal to the mechanic at the machine. The mechanic threwthe switch; it lighted the red glass button and set off two sounds: one wasthe low, humming drone of an electric generator, the other was a peculiarbeat, as regular as the ticking of a clock, but with an oddly muffledresonance. It took them a moment to realize that it came from the amplifierand that they were hearing the beat of Gait's heart.

"Number three," said Ferris, raising a finger in signal.

The mechanic pressed a button under one of the dials. A long shudder ranthrough Gait's body; his left arm shook in jerking spasms, convulsed by theelectric current that circled between his wrist and shoulder. His head fellback, his eyes closed, his lips drawn tight. He made no sound.

When the mechanic lifted his finger off the button, Gait's arm stoppedshaking. He did not move.

The three men glanced about them with an instant's look of groping.

Ferris' eyes were blank, Mouch's terrified, Taggart's disappointed. Thesound of the thumping beat went on through the silence.

"Number two," said Ferris, It was Gait's right leg that twisted inconvulsions, with the current now circling between his hip and ankle. Hishands gripped the edges of the mattress. His head jerked once, from side toside, then lay still.

The beating of the heart grew faintly faster.

Mouch was drawing away, pressing against the back of his armchair.Taggart was sitting on the edge of Ms, leaning forward."Number one, gradual," said Ferris.

Gait's torso jerked upward and fell back and twisted in long shudders,straining against his strapped wrists—as the current was now running from hisone wrist to the other, across his lungs. The mechanic was slowly turning aknob, increasing the voltage of the current; the needle on the dial wasmoving toward the red segment that marked danger. Gait's breath was coming inbroken, panting sounds out of convulsed lungs.

"Had enough?" snarled Ferris, when the current went off.

Gait did not answer. His lips moved faintly, opening for air. The beatfrom the stethoscope was racing. But his breath was falling to an evenrhythm, by a controlled effort at relaxation.

"You're too easy on him!" yelled Taggart, staring at the naked body on themattress.

Gait opened his eyes and glanced at them for a moment. They could tellnothing, except that his glance was steady and fully conscious. Then hedropped his head again and lay still, as if he had forgotten them.

His naked body looked strangely out of place in this cellar. They knew it,though none of them would identify that knowledge. The long lines of hisbody, running from his ankles to the flat hips, to the angle of the waist, tothe straight shoulders, looked like a statue of ancient Greece, sharing thatstatue's meaning, but stylized to a longer, lighter, more active form and agaunter strength, suggesting more restless an energy—the body, not of achariot driver, but of a builder of airplanes. And as the meaning of a statueof ancient Greece—the statue of man as a god—clashed with the spirit of thiscentury's halls, so his body clashed with a cellar devoted to prehistoricalactivities. The clash was the greater, because he seemed to belong withelectric wires, with stainless steel, with precision instruments, with thelevers of a control board. Perhaps—this was the thought most fiercelyresisted and most deeply buried at the bottom of his watchers sensations, thethought they knew only as a diffused hatred and an unfocused terror—perhapsit was the absence of such statues from the modern world that had transformeda generator into an octopus and brought a body such as his into itstentacles.

"I understand you're some sort of electrical expert," said Ferris, andchuckled. "So are we—don't you think so?"

Two sounds answered him in the silence: the drone of the generator and thebeating of Gait's heart.

"The mixed series!" ordered Ferris, waving one finger at the mechanic.

The shocks now came at irregular, unpredictable intervals, one afteranother or minutes apart. Only the shuddering convulsions of Gait's legs,arms, torso or entire body showed whether the current was racing between twoparticular electrodes or through all of them at once. The needles on thedials kept coming close to the red marks, then receding: the machine wascalculated to inflict the maximum intensity of pain without damaging the bodyof the victim.

It was the watchers who found it unbearable to wait through the minutes ofthe pauses filled with the sound of the heartbeat: the heart was now racingin an irregular rhythm. The pauses were calculated to let that beat slowdown, but allow no relief to the victim, who had to wait for a shock at anymoment.

Gait lay relaxed, as if not attempting to fight the pain, but surrenderingto it, not attempting to negate it, but to bear it. When his lips parted forbreath and a sudden jolt slammed them tight again, he did not resist theshaking rigidity of his body, but he let it vanish the instant the currentleft him. Only the skin of his face was pulled tight, and the sealed line ofhis lips twisted sidewise once in a while. When a shock raced through hischest, the gold-copper strands of his hair flew with the jerking of his head,as if waving in a gust of wind, beating against his face, across his eyes.The watchers wondered why his hair seemed to be growing darker, until theyrealized that it was drenched in sweat.

The terror of hearing one's own heart struggling as if about to burst atany moment, had been intended to be felt by the victim. It was the torturerswho were trembling with terror, as they listened to the jagged, broken rhythmand missed a breath with every missing beat. It sounded now as if the heartwere leaping, beating frantically against its cage of ribs, in agony and in adesperate anger. The heart was protesting; the man would not. He lay still,his eyes closed, his hands relaxed, hearing his heart as it fought for hislife.

Wesley Mouch was first to break. "Oh God, Floyd!" he screamed.

"Don't kill him! Don't dare kill him! If he dies, we die!"

"He won't," snarled Ferris. "He'll wish he did, but he won't! The machinewon't let him! It's mathematically computed! It's safe!"

"Oh, isn't it enough? He'll obey us now! I'm sure he'll obey!"

"No! It's not enough! I don't want him to obey! I want him to believe! Toaccept! To want to accept! We've got to have him work for us voluntarily!"

"Go ahead!" cried Taggart. "What are you waiting for? Can't you make thecurrent stronger? He hasn't even screamed yet!"

"What's the matter with you?" gasped Mouch, catching a glimpse ofTaggart's face while a current was twisting Gait's body: Taggart was staringat it intently, yet his eyes seemed glazed and dead, but around thatinanimate stare the muscles of his face were pulled into an obscenecaricature of enjoyment.

"Had enough?" Ferris kept yelling to Gait. "Are you ready to want what wewant?"

They heard no answer. Gait raised his head once in a while and looked atthem. There were dark rings under his eyes, but the eyes were clear andconscious.

In mounting panic, the watchers lost their sense of context and language—and their three voices blended into a progression of indiscriminate shrieks:"We want you to take over! ... We want you to rule!

. . . We order you to give orders! . . . We demand that you dictate!. . . We order you to save us! . . . We order you to think! . . ."They heard no answer but the beating of the heart on which their own livesdepended.

The current was shooting through Gait's chest and the beating was comingin irregular spurts, as if it were racing and stumbling—when suddenly hisbody fell still, relaxing: the beating had stopped.

The silence was like a stunning blow, and before they had time to scream,their horror was topped by another: by the fact that Gait opened his eyes andraised his head.

Then they realized that the drone of the motor had ceased, too, and thatthe red light had gone out on the control panel: the current had stopped; thegenerator was dead.

The mechanic was jabbing his ringer at the button, to no avail. He yankedthe lever of the switch again and again. He kicked the side of the machine.The red light would not go on; the sound did not return.

"Well?" snapped Ferris. "Well? What's the matter?"

"The generator's on the blink," said the mechanic helplessly.

"What's the matter with it?"

"I don't know."

"Well, find out and fix it!"

The man was not a trained electrician; he had been chosen, not for hisknowledge, but for his uncritical capacity for pushing any buttons; theeffort he needed to learn his task was such that his consciousness could berelied upon to have no room for anything else. He opened the rear panel ofthe machine and stared in bewilderment at the intricate coils: he could findnothing visibly out of order. He put on his rubber gloves, picked up a pairof pliers, tightened a few bolts at random, and scratched his head.

"I don't know," he said; his voice had a sound of helpless docility.

"Who am I to know?"

The three men were on their feet, crowding behind the machine to stare atits recalcitrant organs. They were acting merely by reflex: they knew thatthey did not know.

"But you've got to fix it!" yelled Ferris. "It's got to work! We've got tohave electricity!"

"We must continue!" cried Taggart; he was shaking, "It's ridiculous!

I won't have it! I won't be interrupted! I won't let him off!" He pointedin the direction of the mattress.

"Do something!" Ferris was crying to the mechanic. "Don't just standthere! Do something! Fix it! I order you to fix it!"

"But I don't know what's wrong with it," said the man, blinking.

"Then find out!"

"How am I to find out?"

"I order you to fix it! Do you hear me? Make it work—or I'll fire you andthrow you in jail!"

"But I don't know what's wrong with it." The man sighed, bewildered. "Idon't know what to do."

"It's the vibrator that's out of order," said a voice behind them; theywhirled around; Gait was struggling for breath, but he was speaking in thebrusque, competent tone of an engineer. "Take it out and pry off the aluminumcover. You'll find a pair of contacts fused together. Force them apart, takea small file and clean up the pitted surfaces. Then replace the cover, plugit back into the machine—and your generator will work."

There was a long moment of total silence.

The mechanic was staring at Gait; he was holding Gait's glance—and even hewas able to recognize the nature of the sparkle in the dark green eyes; itwas a sparkle of contemptuous mockery.

He made a step back. In the incoherent dimness of his consciousness, insome wordless, shapeless, unintelligible manner, even he suddenly grasped themeaning of what was occurring in that cellar.

He looked at Gait—he looked at the three men—he looked at the machine. Heshuddered, he dropped his pliers and ran out of the room.

Gait burst out laughing.

The three men were backing slowly away from the machine. They werestruggling not to allow themselves to understand what the mechanic hadunderstood.

"No!" cried Taggart suddenly, glancing at Gait and leaping forward, "No! Iwon't let him get away with it!" He fell down on his knees, gropingfrantically to find the aluminum cylinder of the vibrator.

"I'll fix it! I'll work it myself! We've got to go on! We've got to breakhim! "

"Take it easy, Jim," said Ferris uneasily, jerking him up to his feet.

"Hadn't we . . . hadn't we better lay off for the night?" said Mouchpleadingly; he was looking at the door through which the mechanic hadescaped, his glance part-envy, part-terror.

"No!" cried Taggart, "Jim, hasn't he had enough? Don't forget, we have tobe careful."

"No! He hasn't had enough! He hasn't even screamed yet!"

"Jim!" cried Mouch suddenly, terrified by something in Taggart's face. "Wecan't afford to kill him! You know it!"

"I don't care! I want to break him! I want to hear Mm scream! I want—"

And then it was Taggart who screamed. It was a long, sudden, piercingscream, as if at some sudden sight, though his eyes were staring at space andseemed blankly sightless. The sight he was confronting was within him. Theprotective walls of emotion, of evasion, of pretense, of semi-thinking andpseudo-words, built up by him through all of his years, had crashed in thespan of one moment—the moment when he knew that he wanted Gait to die,knowing fully that his own death would follow.

He was suddenly seeing the motive that had directed all the actions of hislife. It was not his incommunicable soul or his love for others or his socialduty or any of the fraudulent sounds by which he had maintained his self-esteem: it was the lust to destroy whatever was living, for the sake ofwhatever was not. It was the urge to defy reality by the destruction of everyliving value, for the sake of proving to himself that he could exist indefiance of reality and would never have to be bound by any solid, immutablefacts. A moment ago, he had been able to feel that he hated Gait above allmen, that the hatred was {woof of Gait's evil, which he need define nofurther, that he wanted Gait to be destroyed for the sake of his ownsurvival. Now he knew that he had wanted Gait's destruction at the price ofhis own destruction to follow, he knew that he had never wanted to survive,he knew that it was Gait's greatness he had wanted to torture and destroy—hewas seeing, it as greatness by his own admission, greatness by the onlystandard that existed, whether anyone chose to admit it or not: the greatnessof a- man who was master of reality in a manner no other had equaled. In themoment when he, lames Taggart, had found himself facing the ultimatum: toaccept reality or die, it was death his emotions had chosen, death, ratherthan surrender to that realm of which Gait was so radiant a son. In theperson of Gait—he knew—he had sought the destruction of all existence.

It was not by means of words that this knowledge confronted hisconsciousness: as all his knowledge had consisted of emotions, so now he washeld by an emotion and a vision that he had no power to dispel. He was nolonger able to summon the fog to conceal the sight of all those blind alleyshe had struggled never to be forced to see: now, at the end of every alley,he was seeing his hatred of existence—he was seeing the face of Cherryl

Taggart with her joyous eagerness to live and that it was this particulareagerness he had always wanted to defeat—he was seeing his face as the faceof a killer whom all men should rightfully loathe, who destroyed values forbeing values, who killed in order not to discover his own irredeemable evil.

"No . . ."he moaned, staring at that vision, shaking his head to escapeit. "No ... No ... "

"Yes," said Gait.

He saw Gait's eyes looking straight at his, as if Gait were seeing thethings he was seeing.

"1 told you that on the radio, didn't I?" said Gait.

This was the stamp James Taggart had dreaded, from which there was noescape: the stamp and proof of objectivity. "No . . ."he said feebly oncemore, but it was no longer the voice of a living consciousness.

He stood for a moment, staring blindly at space, then his legs gave way,folding limply, and he sat on the floor, still staring, unaware of his actionor surroundings.

"Jim . . . !" called Mouch. There was no answer.

Mouch and Ferris did not ask themselves or wonder what it was that hadhappened to Taggart: they knew that they must never attempt to discover it,under peril of sharing his fate. They knew who it was that had been brokentonight. They knew that this was the end of James Taggart, whether hisphysical body survived or not.

"Let's . . . let's get Jim out of here," said Ferris shakily. "Let's gethim to a doctor ... or somewhere . . ."

They pulled Taggart to his feet; he did not resist, he obeyedlethargically, and he moved his feet when pushed. It was he who had reachedthe state to which he had wanted Gait to be reduced. Holding his arms at bothsides, his two friends led him out of the room.

He saved them from the necessity of admitting to themselves that theywanted to escape Gait's eyes. Gait was watching them; his glance was tooausterely perceptive.

"We'll be back," snapped Ferris to the chief of the guards. "Stay here anddon't let anyone in. Understand? No one."

They pushed Taggart into their car, parked by the trees at the entrance."We'll be back." said Ferris to no one in particular, to the trees and thedarkness of the sky.

For the moment, their only certainty was that they had to escape from thatcellar—the cellar where the living generator was left tied by the side of thedead one.

CHAPTER XIN THE NAME OF THE BEST AMONG US

Dagny walked straight toward the guard who stood at the door of "ProjectF". Her steps sounded pourposeful, even and open, rining in the silence ofthe path among the trees. She raised her head to a ra of moonlight, to lethim recognize her face.

"Let me in," she said.

"No admittance," he answered in the voice of a robot. "By order or Dr.Ferris . "

"I am here by order of Mr. Thompson."

"Huh? ... I ... I don't know anything about that.""I do."

"I mean, Dr. Ferris hasn't told me . . . ma'am.""I am telling you."

"But I'm not supposed to take any orders from anyone excepting Dr.Ferris."

"Do you wish to disobey Mr. Thompson?"

"Oh, no, ma'am! But . . . but if Dr. Ferris said to let nobody in, thatmeans nobody-" He added uncertainly and pleadingly, "-doesn't it?"

"Do you know that my name is Dagny Taggart and that you've seen mypictures in the papers with Mr. Thompson and all the top leaders of thecountry?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"Then decide whether you wish to disobey their orders.""Oh, no, ma'am! I don't!""Then let me in."

"But I can't disobey Dr. Ferris, either!""Then choose."

"But I can't choose ma'am! Who am I to choose?""You'll have to."

"Look, " he said hastily, pulling a key from his pocket and turning to thedoor, "I'll ask the chief. He-""No." she said.

Some quality in the tone of her voice made him whirl back to her: she washolding a gun pointed levelly at his heart.

"Listen carefully," she said. "Either you let me in or I shoot you.

You may try to shoot me first, if you can. You have that choice—and noother. Now decide."

His mouth fell open and the key dropped from his hand.

"Get out of my way," she said.

He shook his head frantically, pressing his back against the door.

"Oh Christ, ma'am!" he gulped in the whine of a desperate plea. "I can'tshoot at you, seeing as you come from Mr. Thompson! And I can't let you inagainst the word of Dr. Ferris! What am I to do? I'm only a little fellow!I'm only obeying orders! It's not up to me!"

"It's your life." she said.

"If you let me ask the chief, he'll tell me, he'll—""I won't let you ask anyone."

"But how do I know that you really have an order from Mr. Thompson?"

"You don't. Maybe I haven't. Maybe I'm acting on my own—and you'll bepunished for obeying me. Maybe I have—and you'll be thrown in jail fordisobeying. Maybe Dr.. Ferris and Mr. Thompson agree about this. Maybe theydon't—and you have to defy one or the other. These are the things you have todecide. There is no one to ask, no one to call, no one to tell you. You willhave to decide them yourself."

"But I can't decide! Why me?"

"Because it's your body that's barring my way.""But I can't decide! I'm not supposed to decide!""I'll count to three," she said. "Then I'll shoot."

"Wait! Wait! I haven't said yes or no!" he cried, cringing tighter againstthe door, as if immobility of mind and body were his best protection, "One—"she counted; she could see his eyes staring at her in terror —"Two—" shecould see that the gun held less terror for him than the alternative sheoffered-"Three."

Calmly and impersonally, she, who would have hesitated to fire at ananimal, pulled the trigger and fired straight at the heart of a man who hadwanted to exist without the responsibility of consciousness.

Her gun was equipped with a silencer; there was no sound to attractanyone's attention, only the thud of a body falling at her feet.

She picked up the key from the ground—then waited for a few brief moments,as had been agreed upon.

Francisco was first to join her, coming from behind a corner of thebuilding, then Hank Rearden, then Ragnar Danneskjold. There had been fourguards posted at intervals among the trees, around the building. They werenow disposed of: one was dead, three were left in the brush, bound andgagged.

She handed the key to Francisco without a word. He unlocked the door andwent in, alone, leaving the door open to the width of an inch.The three others waited outside, by that opening.

The hall was lighted by a single naked bulb stuck in the middle of theceiling. A guard stood at the foot of the stairs leading to the second floor.

"Who are you?" he cried at the sight of Francisco entering as if he ownedthe place. "Nobody's supposed to come in here tonight!"

"I did," said Francisco.

"Why did Rusty let you in?"

"He must have had his reasons."

"He wasn't supposed to!"

"Somebody has changed your suppositions." Francisco's eyes were taking alightning inventory of the place. A second guard stood on the landing at theturn of the stairs, looking down at them and listening.

"What's your business?"

"Copper-mining."

"Huh? I mean, who are you?"

"The name's too long to tell you. I'll tell it to your chief. Where ishe?"

"I'm asking the questions!" But he backed a step away. "Don't . . .don't you act like a big shot or I'll—"

"Hey, Pete, he is!" cried the second guard, paralyzed by Francisco'smanner.

The first one was struggling to ignore it; his voice grew louder with thegrowth of his fear, as he snapped at Francisco, "What are you after?""I said IH tell it to your chief. Where is he?""I'm asking the questions!""I'm not answering them."

"Oh, you're not, are you?" snarled Pete, who had but one recourse when indoubt: his hand jerked to the gun on his hip.

Francisco's hand was too fast for the two men to see its motion, and hisgun was too silent. What they saw and heard next was the gun flying out ofPete's hand, along with a splatter of blood from his shattered fingers, andhis muffled howl of pain. He collapsed, groaning.

In the instant when the second guard grasped it, he saw that Francisco'sgun was aimed at him.

"Don't shoot, mister!" he cried.

"Come down here with your hands up," ordered Francisco, holding his gunaimed with one hand and waving a signal to the crack of the door with theother.

By the time the guard descended the stairs, Rearden was there to disarmhim, and Danneskjold to tie his hands and feet. The sight of Dagny seemed tofrighten him more than the rest; he could not understand it: the three menwore caps and windbreakers, and, but for their manner, could be taken for agang of highwaymen; the presence of a lady was inexplicable.

"Now," said Francisco, "where is your chief?"

The guard jerked his head in the direction of the stairs. "Up there.""How many guards are there in the building?""Nine."

"Where are they?"

"One's on the cellar stairs. The others are all up there.""Where?"

"In the big laboratory. The one with the window."

"All of them?"

"Yes."

"What are these rooms?" He pointed at the doors leading off the hall.

"They're labs, too. They're locked for the night."

"Who's got the key?"

"Him." He jerked his head at Pete.

Rearden and Danneskjold took the key from Pete's pocket and hurriedsoundlessly to check the rooms, while Francisco continued, "Are there anyother men in the building?"

"No. "

"Isn't there a prisoner here?"

"Oh . . . yeah, I guess so. There must be, or they wouldn't've kept us allon duty."

"Is he still here?"

"That, I don't know. They'd never tell us,""Is Dr. Ferris here?"

"No. He left ten-fifteen minutes ago."

"Now, that laboratory upstairs—does it open right on the stair landing?""Yes."

"How many doors are there?"

"Three. It's the one in the middle."

"What are the other rooms?"

"There's the small laboratory on one side and Dr. Ferris' office on theother."

"Are there connecting doors between them?""Yes."

Francisco was turning to his companions, when the guard said pleadingly,"Mister, can I ask you a question?""Go ahead.""Who are you?"

He answered in the solemn tone of a drawing-room introduction, "FranciscoDomingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia."

He left the guard gaping at him and turned to a brief, whisperedconsultation with his companions.

In a moment, it was Rearden who went up the stairs—swiftly, soundlesslyand alone.

Cages containing rats and guinea pigs were stacked against the walls ofthe laboratory; they had been put there by the guards who were playing pokeron the long laboratory table in the center. Six of them were playing; twowere standing in opposite corners, watching the entrance door, guns in hand.It was Rearden's face that saved him from being shot on sight when he

entered: his face was too well known to them and too unexpected. He saw eightheads staring at him with recognition and with inability to believe what theywere recognizing.

He stood at the door, his hands in the pockets of his trousers, with thecasual, confident manner of a business executive.

"Who is in charge here?" he asked in the politely abrupt voice of a manwho does not waste time.

"You . . . you're not . . ." stammered a lanky, surly individual at thecard table.

"I'm Hank Rearden. Are you the chief?"

"Yeah! But where in blazes do you come from?"

"From New York."

"What are you doing here?"

"Then, I take it, you have not been notified."

"Should I have ... I mean, about what?" The swift, touchy, resentfulsuspicion that his superiors had slighted his authority, was obvious in thechief's voice. He was a tall, emaciated man, with jerky movements, a sallowface and the restless, unfocused eyes of a drug addict.

"About my business here."

"You . . . you can't have any business here," he snapped, torn between thefear of a bluff and the fear of having been left out of some important, top-level decision. "Aren't you a traitor and a deserter and a—"

"I see that you're behind the times, my good man."

The seven others in the room were staring at Rearden with an awed,superstitious uncertainty. The two who held guns still held them aimed at himin the impassive manner of automatons. He did not seem to take notice ofthem.

"What is it you say is your business here?" snapped the chief.. "I am here to take charge of the prisoner whom you are to deliver tome. "

"If you came from headquarters, you'd know that I'm not supposed to knowanything about any prisoner—and that nobody is to touch him!""Except me."

The chief leaped to his feet, darted to a telephone and seized thereceiver. He had not raised it halfway to his ear when he dropped it abruptlywith a gesture that sent a vibration of panic through the room: he had hadtime to hear that the telephone was dead and to know that the wires were cut.

His look of accusation, as he whirled to Rearden, broke against thefaintly contemptuous reproof of Rearden's voice: "That's no way to guard abuilding—if this is what you allowed to happen. Better let me have theprisoner, before anything happens to him—if you don't want me to report youfor negligence, as well as insubordination."

The chief dropped heavily back on his chair, slumped forward across thetable and looked up at Rearden with a glance that made his emaciated faceresemble the animals that were beginning to stir in the cages.

"Who is the prisoner?" he asked.

"My good man," said Rearden, "if your immediate superiors did not see fitto tell you, I certainly will not."

"They didn't see fit to tell me about your coming here, either!" yelledthe chief, his voice confessing the helplessness of anger and broadcastingthe vibrations of impotence to his men. "How do I know you're on the level?With the phone out of order, who's going to tell me? How am I to know what todo?"

"That's your problem, not mine."

"I don't believe you!" His cry was too shrill to project conviction, "Idon't believe that the government would send you on a mission, when you'reone of those vanishing traitors and friends of John Gait who—"

"But haven't you heard?""What?"

"John Gait has made a deal with the government and has brought us allback."

"Oh, thank God!" cried one of the guards, the youngest.

"Shut your mouth! You're not to have any political opinions!"

snapped the chief, and jerked back to Rearden. "Why hasn't it beenannounced on the radio?"

"Do you presume to hold opinions on when and how the government shouldchoose to announce its policies?"

In the long moment of silence, they could hear the rustle of the animalsclawing at the bars of their cages.

"I think I should remind you," said Rearden, "that your job is not toquestion orders, but to obey them, that you are not to know or understand thepolicies of your superiors, that you are not to judge, to choose or todoubt."

"But I don't know whether I'm supposed to obey you!""If you refuse, you'll take the consequences."

Crouching against the table, the chief moved his glance slowly,appraisingly, from Rearden's face to the two gunmen in the corners. Thegunmen steadied their aim by an almost imperceptible movement. A nervousrustle went through the room. An animal squeaked shrilly in one of the cages.

"I think I should also tell you," said Rearden, his voice faintly harder,"that I am not alone. My friends are waiting outside."

"Where?"

"All around this room.""How many?"

"You'll find out—one way or the other."

"Say, Chief," moaned a shaky voice from among the guards, "we don't wantto tangle with those people, they're—"

"Shut up!" roared the chief, leaping to his feet and brandishing his gunin the direction of the speaker. "You're not going to turn yellow on me, anyof you bastards!" He was screaming to ward off the knowledge that they had.He was swaying on the edge of panic, fighting against the realization thatsomething somehow had disarmed his men. "There's nothing to be scared of!" Hewas screaming it to himself, struggling to recapture the safety of his onlysphere: the sphere of violence. "Nothing and nobody! I'll show you'" Hewhirled around, his hand shaking at the end of his sweeping arm, and fired atRearden.

Some of them saw Rearden sway, his right hand gripping his left shoulder.Others, in the same instant, saw the gun drop out of the chief's hand and hitthe floor in time with his scream and with the spurt of blood from his wrist.Then all of them saw Francisco d'Anconia standing at the door on the left,his soundless gun still aimed at the chief.

All of them were on their feet and had drawn their guns, but they lostthat first moment, not daring to fire.

"I wouldn't, if I were you," said Francisco.

"Jesus!" gasped one of the guards, struggling for the memory of a name hecould not recapture. "That's . . . that's the guy who blew up all the coppermines in the world!"

"It is," said Rearden.

They had been backing involuntarily away from Francisco—and turned to seethat Rearden still stood at the entrance door, with a pointed gun in hisright hand and a dark stain spreading on his left shoulder.

"Shoot, you bastards!" screamed the chief to the wavering men.

"What are you waiting for? Shoot them down!" He was leaning with one armagainst the table, blood running out of the other. "I'll report any man whodoesn't fight! I'll have him sentenced to death for it!"

"Drop your guns," said Rearden.

The seven guards stood frozen for an instant, obeying neither."Let me out of here!" screamed the youngest, dashing for the door on theright.

He threw the door open and sprang back: Dagny Taggart stood on thethreshold, gun in hand.

The guards were drawing slowly to the center of the room, righting aninvisible battle in the fog of their minds, disarmed by a sense of unrealityin the presence of the legendary figures they had never expected to see,feeling almost as if they were ordered to fire at ghosts.

"Drop your guns," said Rearden. "You don't know why you're here.

We do. You don't know who your prisoner is. We do. You don't know why yourbosses want you to guard him. We know why we want to get him out. You don'tknow the purpose of your fight. We know the purpose of ours. If you die, youwon't know what you're dying for. If we do, we will."

"Don't . . . don't listen to him!" snarled the chief. "Shoot! I order youto shoot!"

One of the guards looked at the chief, dropped his gun and, raising hisarms, backed away from the group toward Rearden.

"God damn you!" yelled the chief, seized a gun with his left hand andfired at the deserter.

In time with the fall of the man's body, the window burst into a shower ofglass—and from the limb of a tree, as from a catapult, the tall, slenderfigure of a man flew into the room, landed on its feet and fired at the firstguard in reach.

"Who are you?", screamed some terror-blinded voice.

"Ragnar Danneskjold."

Three sounds answered him: a long, swelling moan of panic—the clatter offour guns dropped to the floor—and the bark of the fifth, fired by a guard atthe forehead of the chief.

By the time the four survivors of the garrison began to reassemble thepieces of their consciousness, their figures were stretched on the floor,bound and gagged; the fifth one was left standing, his hands tied behind hisback.

"Where is the prisoner?" Francisco asked him."In the cellar ... I guess.""Who has the key?""Dr. Ferris."

"Where are the stairs to the cellar?""Behind a door in Dr. Ferris' office.""Lead the way."

As they started, Francisco turned to Rearden. "Are you all right, Hank?""Sure."

"Need to rest?""Hell, no!"

From the threshold of a door in Ferris' office, they looked down a steepflight of stone stairs and saw a guard on the landing below."Come here with your hands up!" ordered Francisco.

The guard saw the silhouette of a resolute stranger and the glint of agun: It was enough. He obeyed immediately; he seemed relieved to escape fromthe damp stone crypt. He was left tied on the floor of the office, along withthe guard who had led them.

Then the four rescuers were free to fly down the stairs to the lockedsteel door at the bottom. They had acted and moved with the precision of acontrolled discipline. Now, it was as if their inner reins had broken.

Danneskjold had the tools to smash the lock. Francisco was first to enterthe cellar, and his arm barred Dagny's way for the fraction of a second—forthe length of a look to make certain that the sight was bearable—then he lether rush past him: beyond the tangle of electric wires, he had seen Gait'slifted head and glance of greeting.

She fell down on her knees by the side of the mattress. Gait looked up ather, as he had looked on their first morning in the valley, his smile waslike the sound of a laughter that had never been touched by pain, his voicewas soft and low: "We never had to take any of it seriously, did we?"

Tears running down her face, but her smile declaring a full, confident,radiant certainty, she answered, "No, we never had to."

Rearden and Danneskjold were cutting his bonds. Francisco held a flask ofbrandy to Gait's lips. Gait drank, and raised himself to lean on an elbowwhen his arms were free. "Give me a cigarette," he said.

Francisco produced a package of dollar-sign cigarettes. Gait's hand shooka little, as he held a cigarette to the flame of a lighter, but Francisco'shand shook much more.

Glancing at his eyes over the flame, Gait smiled and said in the tone ofan answer to the questions Francisco was not asking, "Yes, it was pretty bad,but bearable—and the kind of voltage they used leaves no damage,"

"I'll find them some day, whoever they were . . ." said Francisco; thetone of his voice, flat, dead and barely audible, said the rest.

"If you do, you'll find that there's nothing left of them to kill."

Gait glanced at the faces around him; he saw the intensity of the reliefin their eyes and the violence of the anger in the grimness of theirfeatures; he knew in what manner they were now reliving his torture.

"It's over," he said. "Don't make it worse for yourself than it was forme. "

Francisco turned his face away. "It's only that it was you . . ."hewhispered, "you . . . if it were anyone but you . . ."

"But it had to be me, if they were to try their last, and they've tried,and"—he moved his hand, sweeping the room—and the meaning of those who hadmade it—into the wastelands of the past—"and that's that."

Francisco nodded, his face still turned away; the violent grip of hisfingers clutching Gait's wrist for a moment was his answer.

Gait lifted himself to a sitting posture, slowly regaining control of hismuscles. He glanced up at Dagny's face, as her arm shot forward to help him;he saw the struggle of her smile against the tension of her resisted tears;it was the struggle of her knowledge that nothing could matter beside thesight of his naked body and that this body was living —against her knowledgeof what it had endured. Holding her glance, he raised his hand and touchedthe collar of her white sweater with his fingertips, in acknowledgment and inreminder of the only things that were to matter from now on. The faint tremorof her lips, relaxing into a smile, told him that she understood.

Danneskjold found Gait's shirt, slacks and the rest of his clothing, whichhad been thrown on the floor in a corner of the room. "Do you think you canwalk, John?" he asked.

"Sure."

While Francisco and Rearden were helping Gait to dress, Danneskjoldproceeded calmly, systematically, with no visible emotion, to demolish thetorture machine into splinters.

Gait was not fully steady on his feet, but he could stand, leaning onFrancisco's shoulder. The first few steps were hard, but by the time theyreached the door, he was able to resume the motions of walking.

His one arm encircled Francisco's shoulders for support; his other armheld Dagny's shoulders, both to gain support and to give it.

They did not speak as they walked down the hill, with the darkness of thetrees closing in about them for protection, cutting off the dead glow of themoon and the deader glow in the distance behind them, in the windows of theState Science Institute.

Francisco's airplane was hidden in the brush, on the edge of a meadowbeyond the next hill. There were no human habitations for miles around them.There were no eyes to notice or to question the sudden streaks of theairplane's headlights shooting across the desolation of dead weeds, and theviolent burst of the motor brought to life by Danneskjold, who took thewheel.

With the sound of the door slamming shut behind them and the forwardthrust of the wheels under their feet, Francisco smiled for the first time.

"This is my one and only chance to give you orders," he said, helping Gaitto stretch out in a reclining chair. "Now lie still, relax and take it easy .. . You, too," he added, turning to Dagny and pointing at the seat by Gait'sside.

The wheels were running faster, as if gaining speed and purpose andlightness, ignoring the impotent obstacles of small jolts from the ruts ofthe ground. When the motion turned to a long, smooth streak, when they sawthe dark shapes of the trees sweeping down and dropping past their windows,Gait leaned silently over and pressed his lips to Dagny's hand: he wasleaving the outer world with the one value he had wanted to win from it.

Francisco had produced a first-aid kit and was removing Rearden's shirt tobandage his wound. Gait saw the thin red trickle running from Rearden'sshoulder down his chest.

"Thank you, Hank," he said.

Rearden smiled. "I will repeat what you said when I thanked you, on ourfirst meeting: 'If you understand that I acted for my own sake, you know thatno gratitude is required.' "

"I will repeat," said Gait, "the answer you gave me: 'That is why I thankyou.'"

Dagny noticed that they looked at each other as if their glance were thehandshake of a bond too firm to require any statement. Rearden saw herwatching them—and the faintest contraction of his eyes was like a smile ofsanction, as if his glance were repeating to her the message he had sent herfrom the valley.

They heard the sudden sound of Danneskjold's voice raised cheerfully inconversation with empty space, and they realized that he was speaking overthe plane's radio: "Yes, safe and sound, all of us. . . .

Yes, he's unhurt, just shaken a little, and resting. . . . No, nopermanent injury. . . . Yes, we're all here. Hank Rearden got a flesh wound,but"—he glanced over his shoulder—"but he's grinning at me right now. . . .Losses? I think we lost our temper for a few minutes back there, but we'rerecovering. . . . Don't try to beat me to Gait's Gulch, I'll land first—andI'll help Kay in the restaurant to fix your breakfast."

"Can any outsiders hear him?" asked Dagny.

"No," said Francisco. "It's a frequency they're not equipped to get.""Whom is he talking to?" asked Gait.

"To about half the male population of the valley, " said Francisco, "or asmany as we had space for on every plane available. They are flying behind usright now. Did you think any of them would stay home and leave you in thehands of the looters? We were prepared to get you by open, armed assault onthat Institute or on the Wayne-Falkland, if necessary. But we knew that insuch case we would run the risk of their killing you when they saw that theywere beaten. That's why we decided that the four of us would first try it

alone. Had we failed, the others would have proceeded with an open attack.They were waiting, half a mile away. We had men posted among the trees on thehill, who saw us get out and relayed the word to the others. Ellis Wyatt wasin charge. Incidentally, He's flying your plane. The reason we couldn't getto New Hampshire as fast as Dr. Ferris, is that we had to get our planes fromdistant, hidden landing places, while he had the advantage of open airports.Which, incidentally, he won't have much longer.""No," said Gait, "not much longer."

"That was our only obstacle. The rest was easy. I'll tell you the wholestory later. Anyway, the four of us were all that was necessary to beat theirgarrison."

"One of these centuries," said Danneskjold, turning to them for a moment,"the brutes, private or public, who believe that they can rule their bettersby force, will learn the lesson of what happens when brute force encountersmind and force."

"They've learned it," said Gait. "Isn't that the particular lesson youhave been teaching them for twelve years?"

"I? Yes. But the semester is over. Tonight was the last act of violencethat I'll ever have to perform. It was my reward for the twelve years.

My men have now started to build their homes in the valley. My ship ishidden where no one will find her, until I'm able to sell her for a much morecivilized use. She'll be converted into a transatlantic passenger liner—anexcellent one, even if of modest size. As for me, I will start getting readyto give a different course of lessons. I think III have to brush up on theworks of our teacher's first teacher."

Rearden chuckled. "I'd like to be present at your first lecture onphilosophy in a university classroom," he said. "I'd like to see how yourstudents will be able to keep their mind on the subject and how you'll answerthe sort of irrelevant questions I won't blame them for wanting to ask you."

"I will tell them that they'll find the answers in the subject."

There were not many lights on the earth below. The countryside was anempty black sheet, with a few occasional flickers in the windows of somegovernment structures, and the trembling glow of candles in the windows ofthriftless homes. Most of the rural population had long since been reduced tothe life of those ages when artificial light was an exorbitant luxury, and asunset put an end to human activity. The towns were like scattered puddles,left behind by a receding tide, still holding some precious drops ofelectricity, but drying out in a desert of rations, quotas, controls andpower-conservation rules.

But when the place that had once been the source of the tide—New YorkCity—rose in the distance before them, it was still extending its lights tothe sky, still defying the primordial darkness, almost as if, in an ultimateeffort, in a final appeal for help, it were now stretching its arms to theplane that was crossing its sky. Involuntarily, they sat up, as if atrespectful attention at the deathbed of what had been greatness.

Looking down, they could see the last convulsions: the lights of the carswere darting through the streets, like animals trapped in a maze, franticallyseeking an exit, the bridges were jammed with cars, the approaches to thebridges were veins of massed headlights, glittering bottlenecks stopping allmotion, and the desperate screaming of sirens reached faintly to the heightof the plane. The news of the continent's severed artery had now engulfed thecity, men were deserting their posts, trying, in panic, to abandon New York,seeking escape where all roads were cut off and escape was no longerpossible.

The plane was above the peaks of the skyscrapers when suddenly, with theabruptness of a shudder, as if the ground had parted to engulf it, the citydisappeared from the face of the earth. It took them a moment to realize that

the panic had reached the power stations—and that the lights of New York hadgone out.

Dagny gasped. "Don't look down!" Gait ordered sharply.

She raised her eyes to his face. His face had that look of austerity withwhich she had always seen him meet facts.

She remembered the story Francisco had told her: "He had quit theTwentieth Century. He was living in a garret in a slum neighborhood.

He stepped to the window and pointed at the skyscrapers of the city.

He said that we had to extinguish the lights of the world, and when wewould see the lights of New York go out, we would know that our job wasdone."

She thought of it when she saw the three of them—John Gait, Franciscod'Anconia, Ragnar Danneskjold—look silently at one another for a moment.

She glanced at Rearden; he was not looking down, he was looking ahead, asshe had seen him look at an untouched countryside: with a glance appraisingthe possibilities of action.

When she looked at the darkness ahead, another memory rose in her mind—themoment when, circling above the Afton airport, she had seen the silver bodyof a plane rise like a phoenix from the darkness of the earth. She knew thatnow, at this hour, their plane was carrying all that was left of New YorkCity.

She looked ahead. The earth would be as empty as the space where th6irpropeller was cutting an unobstructed path—as empty and as free.

She knew what Nat Taggart had felt at his start and why now, for the firsttime, she was following him in full loyalty: the confident sense of facing avoid and of knowing that one has a continent to build.

She felt the whole struggle of her past rising before her and droppingaway, leaving her here, on the height of this moment. She smiled—and thewords in her mind, appraising and sealing the past, were the words ofcourage, pride and dedication, which most men had never understood, the wordsof a businessman's language: "Price no object."

She did not gasp and she felt no tremor when, in the darkness below, shesaw a small string of lighted dots struggling slowly westward through thevoid, with the long, bright dash of a headlight groping to protect the safetyof its way; she felt nothing, even though it was a train and she knew that ithad no destination but the void.

She turned to Gait. He was watching her face, as if he had been followingher thoughts. She saw the reflection of her smile in his. "It's the end," shesaid. "It's the beginning," he answered.

Then they lay still, leaning back in their chairs, silently looking ateach other. Then their persons filled each other's awareness, as the sum andmeaning of the future—but the sum included the knowledge of all that had hadto be earned, before the person of another being could come to embody thevalue of one's existence.

New York was far behind them, when they heard Danneskjold answer a callfrom the radio: "Yes, he's awake. I don't think he'll sleep tonight. . . .Yes, I think he can." He turned to glance over his shoulder. "John, Dr.Akston would like to speak to you."

"What? Is he on one of those planes behind us?"

"Certainly."

Gait leaped forward to seize the microphone. "Hello, Dr. Akston,"

he said; the quiet, low tone of his voice was the audible image of a smile

transmitted through space.

"Hello, John." The too-conscious steadiness of Hugh Akston's voice

confessed at what cost <he had waited to learn whether he would ever

pronounce these two words again. "I just wanted to hear your voice . . . just

to know that you're all right."

Gait chuckled and—in the tone of a student proudly presenting a completedtask of homework as proof of a lesson well learned—he answered, "Of course Iam all right, Professor. I had to be. A is A."

The locomotive of the eastbound Comet broke down in the middle of a desertin Arizona. It stopped abruptly, for no visible reason, like a man who hadnot permitted himself to know that he was bearing too much: some overstrainedconnection snapped for good.

When Eddie Willers called for the conductor, he waited a long time beforethe man came in, and he sensed the answer to his question by the look ofresignation on the man's face.

"The engineer is trying to find out what's wrong, Mr. Willers," heanswered softly, in a tone implying that it was his duty to hope, but that hehad held no hope for years.

"He doesn't know?"

"He's working on it." The conductor waited for a polite half-minute andturned to go, but stopped to volunteer an explanation, as if some dim,rational habit told him that any attempt to explain made any unadmittedterror easier to bear. "Those Diesels of ours aren't fit to be sent out onthe road, Mr. Willers. They weren't worth repairing long ago."

"I know," said Eddie Willers quietly.

The conductor sensed that his explanation was worse than none: it led toquestions that men did not ask these days. He shook his head and went out.

Eddie Willers sat looking at the empty darkness beyond the window.

This was the first eastbound Cornet out of San Francisco in many days: shewas the child of his tortured effort to re-establish transcontinentalservice. He could not tell what the past few days had cost him or what he haddone to save the San Francisco terminal from the blind chaos of a civil warthat men were fighting with no concept of their goals; there was no way toremember the deals he had made on the basis of the range of every shiftingmoment. He knew only that he had obtained immunity for the terminal from theleaders of three different warring factions; that he had found a man for thepost of terminal manager who did not seem to have given up altogether; thathe had started one more Taggart Comet on her eastward run, with the bestDiesel engine and the best crew available; and that he had boarded her forhis return journey to New York, with no knowledge of how long his achievementwould last.

He had never had to work so hard; he had done his job as conscientiouslywell as he had always done any assignment; but it was as if he had worked ina vacuum, as if his energy had found no transmitters and had run into thesands of ... of some such desert as the one beyond the window of the Comet.He shuddered: he felt a moment's kinship with the stalled engine of thetrain.

After a while, he summoned the conductor once more. "How is it going?" heasked.

The conductor shrugged and shook his head.

"Send the fireman to a track phone. Have him tell the DivisionHeadquarters to send us the best mechanic available.""Yes, sir."

There was nothing to see beyond the window; turning off the light, EddieWillers could distinguish a gray spread dotted by the black spots of cacti,with no start to it and no end. He wondered how men had ever ventured tocross it, and at what price, in the days when there were no trains. He jerkedhis head away and snapped on the light.

It was only the fact that the Comet was in exile, he thought, mat gave himthis sense of pressing anxiety. She was stalled on an alien rail—on theborrowed track of the Atlantic Southern that ran through Arizona, the trackthey were using without payment. He had to get her out of here, he thought;

he would not feel like this once they returned to their own rail. But thejunction suddenly seemed an insurmountable distance away: on the shore of theMississippi, at the Taggart Bridge.

No, he thought, that was not all. He had to admit to himself what imageswere nagging him with a sense of uneasiness he could neither grasp nordispel; they were too meaningless to define and too inexplicable to dismiss.One was the image of a way station they had passed without stopping, morethan two hours ago: he had noticed the empty platform and the brightlylighted windows of the small station building; the lights came from emptyrooms; he had seen no single human figure, neither in the building nor on thetracks outside. The other image was of the next way station they had passed:its platform was jammed with an agitated mob. Now they were far beyond thereach of the light or sound of any station.

He had to get the Comet out of here, he thought. He wondered why he feltit with such urgency and why it had seemed so crucially important to re-establish the Comet's run. A mere handful of passengers was rattling in herempty cars; men had no place to go and no goals to reach. It was not fortheir sake that he had struggled; he could not say for whose. Two phrasesstood as the answer in his mind, driving him with the vagueness of a prayerand the scalding force of an absolute.

One was: From Ocean to Ocean, forever—the other was: Don't let it go! . .

The conductor returned an hour later, with the fireman, whose face lookedoddly grim.

"Mr. Willers," said the fireman slowly, "Division Headquarters does notanswer."

Eddie Willers sat up, his mind refusing to believe it, yet knowingsuddenly that for some inexplicable reason this was what he had expected."It's impossible!" he said, his voice low; the fireman was looking at him,not moving. "The track phone must have been out of order."

"No, Mr. Willers. It was not out of order. The line was alive all right.

The Division Headquarters wasn't. I mean, there was no one there toanswer, or else no one who cared to."

"But you know that that's impossible!"

The fireman shrugged; men did not consider any disaster impossible thesedays.

Eddie Willers leaped to his feet. "Go down the length of the train,"he ordered the conductor. "Knock on all the doors—the occupied ones, thatis—and see whether there's an electrical engineer aboard.""Yes, sir."

Eddie knew that they felt, as he felt it, that they would find no suchman; not among the lethargic, extinguished faces of the passengers they hadseen. "Come on," he ordered, turning to the fireman.

They climbed together aboard the locomotive. The gray-haired engineer wassitting in his chair, staring out at the cacti. The engine's headlight hadstayed on and it stretched out into the night, motionless and straight,reaching nothing but the dissolving blur of crossties.

"Let's try to find what's wrong," said Eddie, removing his. coat, hisvoice half-order, half-plea. "Let's try some more."

"Yes, sir," said the engineer, without resentment or hope.

The engineer had exhausted his meager store of knowledge; he had checkedevery source of trouble he could think of. He went crawling over and underthe machinery, unscrewing its parts and screwing them back again, taking outpieces and replacing them, dismembering the motors at random, like a childtaking a clock apart, but without the child's conviction that knowledge ispossible.

The fireman kept leaning out of the cab's window, glancing at the blackstillness and shivering, as if from the night air that was growing colder.

"Don't worry," said Eddie Willers, assuming a tone of confidence.

"We've got to do our best, but if we fail, they'll send us help sooner orlater. They don't abandon trains in the middle of nowhere."

'They didn't used to," said the fireman.

Once in a while, the engineer raised his grease-smeared face to look atthe grease-smeared face and shirt of Eddie Willers. "What's the use, Mr.Willers?" he asked.

"We can't let it go!" Eddie answered fiercely; he knew dimly that what hemeant was more than the Comet . . . and more than the railroad.

Moving from the cab through the three motor units and back to the cabagain, his hands bleeding, his shirt sticking to his back, Eddie Willers wasstruggling to remember everything he had ever known about engines, anythinghe had learned in college, and earlier: anything he had picked up in thosedays when the station agents at Rockdale Station used to chase him off therungs of their lumbering switch engines.

The pieces connected to nothing; his brain seemed jammed and tight; heknew that motors were not his profession, he knew that he did not know andthat it was now a matter of life or death for him to discover the knowledge.He was looking at the cylinders, the blades, the wires, the control panelsstill winking with lights. He was struggling not to allow into his mind thethought that was pressing against its periphery: What were the chances andhow long would it take—according to the mathematical theory of probability—for primitive men, working by rule-of-thumb, to hit the right combination ofparts and re-create the motor of this engine?

"What's the use, Mr. Willers?" moaned the engineer.

"We can't let it go!" he cried.

He did not know how many hours had passed when he heard the fireman shoutsuddenly, "Mr. Willers! Look!"

The fireman was leaning out the window, pointing into the darkness behindthem.

Eddie Willers looked. An odd little light was swinging jerkily far in thedistance; it seemed to be advancing at an imperceptible rate; it did not looklike any sort of light he could identify.

After a while, it seemed to him that he distinguished some large blackshapes advancing slowly; they were moving in a line parallel with the track;the spot of light hung low over the ground, swinging; he strained his ears,but heard nothing.

Then he caught a feeble, muffled beat that sounded like the hoofs ofhorses. The two men beside him were watching the black shapes with a look ofgrowing terror, as if some supernatural apparition were advancing upon themout of the desert night. In the moment when they chuckled suddenly, joyously,recognizing the shapes, it was Eddie's face that froze into a look of terrorat the sight of a ghost more frightening than any they could have expected:it was a train of covered wagons.

The swinging lantern jerked to a stop by the side of the engine. "Hey,bud, can I give you a lift?" called a man who seemed to be the leader; he waschuckling. "Stuck, aren't you?"

The passengers of the Comet were peering out of the windows; some weredescending the steps and approaching. Women's faces peeked from the wagons,from among the piles of household goods; a baby wailed somewhere at the rearof the caravan.

"Are you crazy?" asked Eddie Willers.

"No, I mean it, brother. We got plenty of room. We'll give you folks alift—for a price—if you want to get out of here." He was a lanky, nervous

man, with loose gestures and an insolent voice, who looked like a side-showbarker.

"This is the Taggart Comet," said Eddie Willers, choking.

"The Comet, eh? Looks more like a dead caterpillar to me. What's thematter, brother? You're not going anywhere—and you can't get there any more,even if you tried."

"What do you mean?"

"You don't think you're going to New York, do you?"

"We are going to New York."

"Then . . . then you haven't heard?"

"What?"

"Say, when was the last time you spoke to any of your stations?""I don't know! . . . Heard what?"

"That your Taggart Bridge is gone. Gone. Blasted to bits. Sound-rayexplosion or something. Nobody knows exactly. Only there ain't any bridge anymore to cross the Mississippi. There ain't any New York any more—leastways,not for folks like you and me to reach."

Eddie Willers did not know what happened next; he had fallen back againstthe side of the engineer's chair, staring at the open door of the motor unit;he did not know how long he stayed there, but when, at last, he turned hishead, he saw that he was alone. The engineer and the fireman had left thecab. There was a scramble of voices outside, screams, sobs, shouted questionsand the sound of the side-show barker's laughter.

Eddie pulled himself to the window of the cab: the Comet's passengers andcrew were crowding around the leader of the caravan and his semi-raggedcompanions; he was waving his loose arms in gestures of command. Some of thebetter-dressed ladies from the Comet—whose husbands had apparently been firstto make a deal—were climbing aboard the covered wagons, sobbing and clutchingtheir delicate makeup cases.

"Step right up, folks, step right up!" the barker was yelling cheerfully.

"We'll make room for everybody! A bit crowded, but moving—better thanbeing left here for coyote fodder! The day of the iron horse is past! All wegot is plain, old-fashioned horse! Slow, but sure!"

Eddie Willers climbed halfway down the ladder on the side of the engine,to see the crowd and to be heard. He waved one arm, hanging onto the rungswith the other. "You're not going, are you?" he cried to his passengers."You're not abandoning the Comet?"

They drew a little away from him, as if they did not want to look at himor answer. They did not want to hear questions their minds were incapable ofweighing. He saw the blind faces of panic.

"What's the matter with the grease-monkey?" asked the barker, pointing atEddie.

"Mr. Willers," said the conductor softly, "it's no use . . .""Don't abandon the Comet!" cried Eddie Willers. "Don't let it go! Oh God,don't let it go!"

"Are you crazy?" cried the barker. "You've no idea what's going on at yourrailroad stations and headquarters! They're running around like a pack ofchickens with their heads cut off! I don't think there's going to be arailroad left in business this side of the Mississippi, by tomorrow morning!"

"Better come along, Mr. Willers," said the conductor.

"No!" cried Eddie, clutching the metal rung as if he wanted his hand togrow fast to it.

The barker shrugged. "Well, it's your funeral!"

"Which way are you going?" asked the engineer, not looking at Eddie."Just going, brother! Just looking for some place to stop . . . somewhere.We're from Imperial Valley, California. The 'People's Party'

crowd grabbed the crops and any food we had in the cellars. Hoarding, theycalled it. So we just picked up and went. Got to travel by night, on accountof the Washington crowd. . . .We're just looking for some place to live. . .. You're welcome to come along, buddy, if you've got no home—or else we candrop you off closer to some town or another."

The men of that caravan—thought Eddie indifferently—looked too mean-mindedto become the founders of a secret, free settlement, and not mean-mindedenough to become a gang of raiders; they had no more destination to find thanthe motionless beam of the headlight; and, like that beam, they woulddissolve somewhere in the empty stretches of the country.

He stayed on the ladder, looking up at the beam. He did not watch whilethe last men ever to ride the Taggart Comet were transferred to the coveredwagons.

The conductor went last. "Mr. Willers!" he called desperately."Come along!""No," said Eddie.

The side-show barker waved his arm in an upward sweep at Eddie's figure onthe side of the engine above their heads. "I hope you know what you'redoing!" he cried, his voice half-threat, half-plea. "Maybe somebody will comethis way to pick you up—next week or next month! Maybe! Who's going to, thesedays?"

"Get away from here," said Eddie Willers.

He climbed back into the cab—when the wagons jerked forward and wentswaying and creaking off into the night. He sat in the engineer's chair of amotionless engine, his forehead pressed to the useless throttle.

He felt like the captain of an ocean liner in distress, who preferred togo down with his ship rather than be saved by the canoe of savages tauntinghim with the superiority of their craft.

Then, suddenly, he felt the blinding surge of a desperate, righteousanger. He leaped to his feet, seizing the throttle. He had to start thistrain; in the name of some victory that he could not name, he had to startthe engine, moving, Past the stage of thinking, calculation or fear, moved bysome righteous defiance, he was pulling levers at random, he was jerking thethrottle back and forth, he was stepping on the dead man's pedal, which wasdead, he was groping to distinguish the form of some vision that seemed bothdistant and close, knowing only that his desperate battle was fed by thatvision and was fought for its sake.

Don't let it go! his mind was crying—while he was seeing the streets ofNew York—Don't let it go!—while he was seeing the lights of railroad signals-Don ' t let it go!—while he was seeing the smoke rising proudly from factorychimneys, while he was struggling to cut through the smoke and reach thevision at the root of these visions.

He was pulling at coils of wire, he was linking them and tearing themapart—while the sudden sense of sunrays and pine trees kept pulling at thecorners of his mind. Dagny!—he heard himself crying soundlessly—

Dagny, in the name of the best within us! . . .He was jerking at futilelevers and at a throttle that had nothing to move. . . . Dagny!—he was cryingto a twelve-year-old girl in a sunlit clearing of the woods—

in the name of the best within us, I must now start this train! . . .Dagny, that is what it was . . . and you knew it, then, but I didn't . . .you knew it when you turned to look at the rails. ... I said, "not businessor earning a living" . . . but, Dagny, business and earning a living and thatin man which makes it possible—that is the best within us, that was the thingto defend ... in the name of saving it, Dagny, I must now start this train.

When he found that he had collapsed on the floor of the cab and knew thatthere was nothing he could do here any longer, he rose and he climbed down

the ladder, thinking dimly of the engine's wheels, even though he knew thatthe engineer had checked them. He felt the crunch of the desert dust underhis feet when he let himself drop to the ground. He stood still and, in theenormous silence, he heard the rustle of tumbleweeds stirring in thedarkness, like the chuckle of an invisible army made free to move when theComet was not. He heard a sharper rustle close by—and he saw the small grayshape of a rabbit rise on its haunches to sniff at the steps of a car of theTaggart Comet. With a jolt of murderous fury, he lunged in the direction ofthe rabbit, as if he could defeat the advance of the enemy in the person ofthat tiny gray form. The rabbit darted off into the darkness—but he knew thatthe advance was not to be defeated.

He stepped to the front of the engine and looked up at the letters TT.Then he collapsed across the rail and lay sobbing at the foot of the engine,with the beam of a motionless headlight above him going off into a limitlessnight.

The music of Richard Halley's Fifth Concerto streamed from his keyboard,past the glass of the window, and spread through the air, over the lights ofthe valley. It was a symphony of triumph. The notes flowed up, they spoke ofrising and they were the rising itself, they were the essence and the form ofupward motion, they seemed to embody every human act and thought that hadascent as its motive. It was a sunburst of sound, breaking out of hiding andspreading open. It had the freedom of release and the tension of purpose. Itswept space clean and left nothing but the joy of an unobstructed effort.Only a faint echo within the sounds spoke of that from which the music hadescaped, but spoke in laughing astonishment at the discovery that there wasno ugliness or pain, and there never had had to be. It was the song of animmense deliverance.

The lights of the valley fell in glowing patches on the snow stillcovering the ground. There were shelves of snow on the granite ledges and onthe heavy limbs of the pines. But the naked branches of the birch trees had afaintly upward thrust, as if in confident promise of the coming leaves ofspring.

The rectangle of light on the side of a mountain was the window ofMulligan's study. Midas Mulligan sat at his desk, with a map and a column offigures before him. He was listing the assets of his bank and working on aplan of projected investments. He was noting down the locations he waschoosing: "New York—Cleveland—Chicago . . . New York—Philadelphia . . . NewYork . . . New York . . . New York . . ."

The rectangle of light at the bottom of the valley was the window ofDanneskjold's home. Kay Ludlow sat before a mirror, thoughtfully studying theshades of film make-up, spread open in a battered case.

Ragnar Danneskjold lay stretched on a couch, reading a volume of the worksof Aristotle: ". . . for these truths hold good for everything that is, andnot for some special genus apart from others. And all men use them, becausethey are true of being qua being. . . . For a principle which every one musthave who understands anything that is, is not a hypothesis. . . . Evidentlythen such a principle is the most certain of all; which principle this is,let us proceed to say. It is, that the same attribute cannot at the same timebelong and not belong to the same subject in the same respect. . ."

The rectangle of light in the acres of a farm was the window of thelibrary of Judge Narragansett. He sat at a table, and the light of his lampfell on the copy of an ancient document. He had marked and crossed out thecontradictions in its statements that had once been the cause of itsdestruction. He was now adding a new clause to its pages: "Congress shallmake no law abridging the freedom of production and trade . . ."

The rectangle of light in the midst of a forest was the window of thecabin of Francisco d'Anconia. Francisco lay stretched on the floor, by the

dancing tongues of a fire, bent over sheets of paper, completing the drawingof his smelter. Hank Rearden and Ellis Wyatt sat by the fireplace. "John willdesign the new locomotives," Rearden was saying, "and Dagny will run thefirst railroad between New York and Philadelphia. She—" And, suddenly, onhearing the next sentence, Francisco threw his head up and burst outlaughing, a laughter of greeting, triumph and release. They could not hearthe music of Halley's Fifth Concerto now flowing somewhere high above theroof, but Francisco's laughter matched its sounds. Contained in the sentencehe had heard, Francisco was seeing the sunlight of spring on the open lawnsof homes across the country, he was seeing the sparkle of motors, he wasseeing the glow of the steel in the rising frames of new skyscrapers, he wasseeing the eyes of youth looking at the future with no uncertainty or fear.

The sentence Rearden had uttered was: "She will probably try to take theshirt off my back with the freight rates she's going to charge, but— I'll beable to meet them."

The faint glitter of light weaving slowly through space, on the highestaccessible ledge of a mountain, was the starlight on the strands of Gait'shair. He stood looking, not at the valley below, but at the darkness of theworld beyond its walls. Dagny's hand rested on his shoulder, and the windblew her hair to blend with his. She knew why he had wanted to walk throughthe mountains tonight and what he had stopped to consider. She knew whatwords were his to speak and that she would be first to hear them.

They could not see the world beyond the mountains, there was only a voidof darkness and rock, but the darkness was hiding the ruins of a continent:the roofless homes, the rusting tractors, the lightless streets, theabandoned rail. But far in the distance, on the edge of the earth, a smallflame was waving in the wind, the defiantly stubborn flame of Wyatt's Torch,twisting, being torn and regaining its hold, not to be uprooted orextinguished. It seemed to be calling and waiting for the words John Gait wasnow to pronounce.

"The road is cleared," said Gait. "We are going back to the world."He raised his hand and over the desolate earth he traced in space the signof the dollar.

THE END

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

"My personal life," says Ayn Rand, "is a postscript to my novels; itconsists of the sentence: 'And I mean it.' I have always lived by thephilosophy I present in my books— and it has worked for me, as it works formy characters. The concretes differ, the abstractions are the same.

"I decided to be a writer at the age of nine, and everything I have donewas integrated to that purpose. I am an American by choice and conviction. Iwas born in Europe, but I came to America because this was the country basedon my moral premises and the only country where one could be fully free towrite. I came here alone, after graduating from a European college. I had adifficult struggle, earning my living at odd jobs, until I could make afinancial success of my writing. No one helped me, nor did I think at anytime that it was anyone's duty to help me.

"In college, I had taken history as my major subject, and philosophy as myspecial interest; the first—in order to have a factual knowledge of men'spast, for my future writing; the second—in order to achieve an objectivedefinition of my values. I found that the first could be learned, but thesecond had to be done by me.

"I have held the same philosophy I now hold, for as far back as I canremember. I have learned a great deal through the years and expanded myknowledge of details, of specific issues, of definitions, of applications—andI intend to continue expanding it—but I have never had to change any of myfundamentals. My philosophy, in essence, is the concept of man as a heroicbeing, with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, withproductive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his onlyabsolute.

"The only philosophical debt I can acknowledge is to Aristotle. I mostemphatically disagree with a great many parts of his philosophy—but hisdefinition of the laws of logic and of the means of human knowledge is sogreat an achievement that his errors are irrelevant by comparison. You willfind my tribute to him in the titles of the three parts of ATLAS SHRUGGED.

"My other acknowledgment is on the dedication page of this novel. I knewwhat values of character I wanted to find in a man. I met such a man—and wehave been married for twenty-eight years. His name is Frank O'Connor.

"To all the readers who discovered The Fountainhead and asked me manyquestions about the wider application of its ideas, I want to say that I amanswering these questions in the present novel and that The Fountainhead wasonly an overture to ATLAS SHRUGGED.

"I trust that no one will tell me that men such as I write about don'texist. That this book has been written—and published—is my proof that theydo. "





